# Best Games of 1986

## Castlevania

The first Castlevania game still remains, in my eyes, one of the best I’ve played in the series. The central premise of the design is that you have a stiff, limited moveset, but the game is built around that. It’s challenging, but controls tightly. Given this, not much else is needed for an enjoyable “Classicvania”. The game is just the right length for its difficulty, which I think is where 3 faltered. Number 1 also is far less vertical, which is good when the stairs are the cheapest element of the game. The one major flaw with these games is juggling your subweapons, as it’s often better off to die in the early stage where you can get the best weapon rather than at a checkpoint. At least you can get them back at all! And the game is still a pretty fair challenge without them, but whip-only isn’t for me.

Certainly it’s important as well to mention the horror tropes and gothic architecture, which imbue a sense of style to the series. They are limited here with the NES, but it helped set the tone for how future games would look.

## Metroid

This might be one of the stranger entries on my list, because—yes it’s a classic, but—I’m not even sure if I’d consider this a must-play today. First there were superior sequels, then a more accessible remake, and now Metroid inspirations are one of the most popular indie game genres. Certainly most of this is true of any classic game, but Metroid is especially rough around the edges. Though I’ve played it a lot, first getting it on the GBA Classic NES Series (having missed it on NES), I’ve only done one proper full playthrough. Obtaining a map from the internet is practically mandatory, as the game is full of repetitive corridors that look similar, not to mention its fair share of obtuse secrets.  

These flaws are also what made the game so compelling. There is something appealing in fiction about the portrayal of being alone in an oppressive, alien world. Metroid throws you straight into the action and immediately teaches its once-novel tricks of omni-directional exploration and item-based progression. There are many clunky and frustrating moments along the way, namely how much dying sets you back on energy and there are few opportunities to farm it, but there’s an addicting element to getting back out on your adventure. 

Metroid takes me back to a time when I could play a game without trying to beat it, and that is perhaps the best way for me to enjoy it now. The absence of an in-game map and other innovations from later games make beating this one a tough task. But with an atmosphere bolstered by chilling 8-bit tunes and surprisingly effective plain black backgrounds, perhaps the best thing about the original Metroid is being lost in its world rather than getting out of it.

## The Legend of Zelda

Let’s get this out of the way: Zelda is my favorite game series, so it shouldn’t come as a huge surprise that the first game will be the first of many Zeldas to appear here. Even so, I must admit I was never the biggest fan of it. I did play this at a young age, and it certainly left an impression, but it was one of those games for a child that just feels hopelessly impossible. Even though we had the included physical map, which plotted locations to the first few dungeons, how was anyone supposed to figure this out? I had seen nothing like it (granted, it was probably the less than 10th game I ever played), this huge world, laid out in the open rather than a pre-selected series of stages. Many dungeons simply require you to find the square of the map they are on and walk in, but then later on you need to find the hidden entrances. The second quest further expands upon this; my first time doing that I feel like I used the whistle or candle on every screen just to find the stupid dungeons.

I think part of the reason I don’t hold this as highly is that I did beat (but not play in general) Ocarina of Time before it, and that invites a lot of comparison to the narrative structure, obtuseness (or lack thereof) of clues, and dungeon puzzles. By the third Zelda game and on, these were so fleshed out that the original looks very simple. I understand this simplicity is exactly why many still love the original; there is a degree of freedom to tackling the world that most of the later games gave up in exchange for concepts like puzzles that more heavily involve specific items. And also to its credit, the original Zelda has a lot of concepts that are easy to take for granted now that were less common then—numerous equippable items, permanent character upgrades, a (primitive) in-game map, and environmental secrets.