# Best Games of 1987

## Zelda II: The Adventure of Link
Another one of the weird NES sequels, though not well beloved, I actually have always preferred this to the original Zelda. When you first boot this up, it will immediately look different as you exit out of the side-scrolling North Palace, but then… back to the familiar top-down? No, not exactly. Zelda II’s main departure from the original is how it plays like an RPG, where you traverse a scaled down world map, then enter dungeons, caves, towns and other encounters, where it “zooms in” to detailed side-scrolling sections. Admittedly, the side-scrolling action doesn’t _feel_ like Zelda, but when you consider this was the second Zelda game at the time, it doesn’t seem as unusual.

I’ve always found the combat to provide a simple satisfaction, much in the same way Castlevania does, although Link is far more nimble. My biggest complaint (aside from obtuse clues) is that the ability to use items like a boomerang or bow was eschewed in favor of spells, and the few items you do obtain are passive, or only do something on the world map. Having magic isn’t necessarily a bad thing, but this game’s age shows here: aside from giving you too few magic points and not enough places to consistently replenish it, most of the spells serve no general purpose. Instead, they are usually meant to solve a few specific obstacles or defeat a certain enemy. Outside of a town, healing is also strictly tied to an expensive spell, which is usually a downer, since this game is pretty challenging. But you do get extra lives! Overall, I think it’s in some ways easier and other ways harder than the original. It’s not as bad as people make it out to be, just different. Most of the same adventure elements are there, and its different approach to combat is still fun. On the other hand, I concede that the world is much more segmented, so I can see how it totally kills the big open world vibe that made the original special.