# Best Games of 1988

## Super Mario Bros. 2

The oddball sequel to SMB, for a long time I had a mixed opinion of this, but I’ve learned to appreciate it for what it is. Among the many strange NES sequels, perhaps this one most represents a deliberate effort not to replicate its hit predecessor: there literally was a different SMB2 that was left in Japan for having too much similarity to the original. Instead, the American version is a game that plays much more like an “adventure” platformer, eschewing the timer and simple left-to-right layouts from before, but still within an overall linear sequence of levels. 

SMB2 stands out due to its weird cast of characters and scenery, possibly owing to its origins as a re-skinned game. I remember that as a kid I used to actually be terrified of the floating mask that comes after you when you steal the key. To this day I still find a certain mystique surrounding the visual design of many of its levels. It feels like it belongs in Mario, yet there is a certain vibe that was never replicated again in any future mainline Mario games.

## Mega Man 2

Yet another NES sequel, but instead of being the risky jump from a smash hit, MM2 is more of your consummate sequel: it took a decently successful game and ironed out many of the flaws, creating something that was familiar but refined in every way. MM2 established a lot of conventions for the series, like the general look and feel of menus, the 8 boss standard and the concept of a fortress culminating in a capsule boss rush before the final battle. It also is a game that lacks refinement of its own in many ways. Some of them are annoying (those Wily 1 platform jumps), but others somehow only seem to enhance its legacy. Take the metal blades, one of the most overpowered weapons in all of gaming: effective against the highest number of enemies in the game, shot penetration, multi-directional, all while consuming barely any energy.

Later MM games would start balancing the weapons and bosses to having only one or two weaknesses each. This approach makes sense, but for my money, there is something fun about MM2; it doesn’t need to be super hard like the others to be enjoyable. It’s also a bonus to not have to pull out a guide for weaknesses since you can just assume that almost anything is weak to metal blades. It doesn’t demand your dedication and attention like other MM games, but if you don’t mind that, sometimes it’s a great one to sit back with and breeze through while you appreciate the music and level design.

## Super Mario Bros. 3

SMB3 was my first _favorite_ game. This does not mean it was the first game I played that I enjoyed, but the first time I started thinking about games as favorites. Maybe that just says more about where I was at in my mental development than it does about the game, as I was probably only 5 or 6 years old,  but whatever the case, this is where things were different. Games were no longer a thing to put on and pass time and have fun and try to win. After this, even if I didn’t fully realize it at the time, this is when I first started to see games as their own distinct experiences, each having something different to offer, sometimes good or bad. 

With Mario 3, it’s really hard to say anything bad, even to this day—it’s not only the best NES game, but one of the few that still fully holds up by modern standards, and would probably land in my hypothetical overall top 10. Considering both SMB2 versions’ gameplay and history, in some ways this is the first true successor to SMB1, and immediately into the game it becomes apparent that there were some significant upgrades. First, a world map that teases you with branching paths and optional levels. Then ten seconds into the first level you get a brand new power up, which immediately teaches you not just its ability, but that these levels… scroll up! And if that doesn’t really sound like a big deal, well, it is just a minute into the game, and they really hit the ground running from there.

Flush with wilder secrets, clearly varied visual themes, bankable power-ups (including warps!), ambitious level design and of course, those suits, SMB3 raised the bar immeasurably high over its predecessors. The arcade leftovers of SMB1, the adherence to some semblance of patterned rigidity—these were obliterated for a sequel where you quickly learn anything goes. This is where the wonder for Mario truly began to take off, beginning the tradition of Mario games being somehow extremely refined yet consistently experimental. Whenever Mario does experiment, it usually lands, yet even a great idea isn’t immune to being culled from a future game in the name of constantly innovating. It’s a bit of a grim fate for all of these amazing ideas, but it is also what makes a game like SMB3 consistently worth coming back to. The greatest games should feel at home their respective series, yet also provide a wholly unique experience to keep them from going obsolete in favor of future entries.