# Best Games of 1990

## StarTropics

It’s easy to say that StarTropics is just a Zelda clone—and not really inaccurate either, but it’s a great one. Even… gasp… better? than either of the proper Zelda games? Now I can’t claim that it is more significant, or overall cleverly designed, but I personally always had more _fun_ with it. The basic premise is that it’s Zelda, in the modern age, with a bunch of American-centric references and an adventure revolving around alien abduction, even complete with its own boy (teenage) protagonist, Mike Jones.

The gameplay is sort of a stripped-down hybrid of Zelda 1 and 2—you traverse through a Zelda 2-style world map, then enter zoomed-in dungeons along the way that resemble the first Zelda’s top-down style. Mike attacks with a yo-yo (later upgradeable) that functions much like the sword, and along the way you can pick up a few special weapons that provide some added range and other abilities. The main departure from Zelda is that these are only temporary, picked up in each dungeon in fixed spots and then gone afterwards. This is because the game is structured linearly overall. You can get some permanent upgrades to your hearts along the way, but by the end of the game it will max your health regardless. Likewise, there are a few puzzles in getting through the overworld, but overall there isn’t much in the way of proper exploration.

Ultimately then, StarTropics is mainly about the dungeon experience. They aren’t as filled with secrets as Zelda, but provide their own approach to puzzles and deception. Much of the game revolves around jumping on tiles, which I promise is more interesting than it sounds. You are limited to moving on a grid, which can be jarring coming off Zelda, but it adds a fun element of timing and patience. Some may prefer the sequel, which has unrestricted 8-direction movement, but in my opinion it added too much precision into a genre that isn’t suited for true platforming. But the coolest thing about StarTropics is the in-game revelation of a progression lock that can be found by dipping a physical letter included in the game in water—good thing we bought a new copy at the time since there was no internet!

## Mega Man 3

The third Mega Man game takes a few steps both forward and backward from 2. Rush was a definite upgrade on the “platform item” concept and gave Mega Man an iconic sidekick. The trend of additional levels before Wily’s fortress started here. And while I’ve never been a huge fan of the slide (especially after playing MMX, it is begging to have its own button), it doesn’t hurt to have a little bit more maneuverability. 

On the other hand, this MM is perhaps the most plagued by technical problems. It’s not major, but whenever I play it, things like the collision detection and the slowdown feel 5% more off than usual. The Wily stages are empty, and the Doc Robot fights do not feel right at all. It is one of the rare early instances of an entry from a reputable developer that feels noticeably unfinished. But aside from those problems, the music is still on point as ever, and the Robot Master stages are textbook Mega Man. It’s a great half a game that takes a big nosedive, but I’m a sucker for Mega Man, so it’s on the list. Deal with it!

## Super Mario World

Though perhaps not as big of a leap as SMB3, SMW is undeniably an outstanding game full of its own new ideas. Many of course will point to Yoshi, and rightfully so, but it always felt a bit to me like the multi-colored dinosaur was a tradeoff for having fewer suits. Yoshi is far more useful overall, but this is the point where Mario started getting a bit more streamlined and easier. That’s not to say SMW is lacking in challenge, especially if you know where to look. The biggest innovation it brings is multiple exits, and with that, an even greater emphasis on exploration, in a series where exploring off the beaten path was already its own reward. 

All these years later, I’ve never felt like there is a “correct” path through the game. Sure, there are numbered castles, but it’s inevitable to end up on a secret path. Honestly, the number of secret exits and routes can sometimes get overwhelming; sadly, with later 2D games, I feel they went a little bit too much in the other direction reducing the secrets. Ultimately, the confusing paths don’t matter, as it’s much more non-linear than its predecessors, allowing you to revisit any level after it has been cleared; and it certainly is worth clearing, if not every exit, at least every level. 

This review is turning more negative than I anticipated, but it kind of goes without saying that SMW is a great game. The structure/order of the levels may not be _perfect_, but the levels themselves are polished to an absurd degree, and full of all kinds of different visual flair and platforming challenges. With a game like Mario, you tend to run out of superlatives; their greatness really needs no explanation, just ask nearly anyone who has played them. The thing that really jumps out to me with Super Mario World is that, to this day, Mario has still never looked, controlled or sounded better in 2D.