# Best Games of 1991

## Sonic the Hedgehog

It’s hard to believe that Sonic was once considered a rival to Mario, but I’ll always have a certain fondness for the classic Sonic games. Sonic delivered something of a platforming thrill-ride that was never seen before, justifying a next generation of consoles even more than Super Mario World did, however gorgeous as it was. You don’t need me to say it: speed is the name of the game. For as many high-velocity moments there are though, Sonic has always slowed things down a bit, and the first game is no exception, with Marble Zone and Labyrinth Zone coming to mind. While the first entry is not nearly as fleshed out or memorable as the sequels, it’s undeniably an influential classic, and one I’ve gone back to plenty of times in spite of its flaws.

## Mega Man 4

Four entries in, Capcom delivered their first truly polished Mega Man game. Sadly after this point, with the greater polish came diminishing returns, but I still enjoy number 4 a good deal. This was the first time they tried the villain twist, which while predictable and eventually tiresome, meant getting an entire second fortress. The extra stages in this one weren’t as lazy as they would get in later entries, and even tried a few new things, like autoscrolling stages. During the normal stages there are also secret paths with optional items to find. The biggest change is the introduction of Mega Man’s charge shot, which does throw off the rock-paper-scissors concept a bit, but is not as overpowered as in 5. It isn’t the most iconic entry in the series, but definitely worth checking out to feel a smoother Mega Man experience.

## The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past

After the experimental blip in number 2, the third Zelda game reverts back to the top-down formula of the original and enhances it to perfection. Now with an expanded narrative, themes for each dungeon, and a greater emphasis on item-based puzzles, A Link to the Past set the template for Zelda games to come. I didn’t get to play this one until many years later, when I realized how much even my beloved Ocarina of Time borrows from it. Link’s iconic weapon, the Master Sword, makes its debut. More of the history of Hyrule and its key characters is fleshed out, and there is an exciting dual-world concept.

Something about the idea of adventuring through a whimsical world, gradually expanding your strength and arsenal as you slowly gain the ability to visit more of it, never gets old. Nameless elders of the first game are replaced with quirky characters, hiding some sort of secret for you to uncover at every turn. Geographic features and biomes are realized in far greater detail. And of course the dungeons are so much fun. Instead of just being a big maze, they’re laid out like more of a two-part task, first in completing half of it to uncover its treasure, then deploying that treasure to open new areas in the second half. Sometimes it is overly formulaic, but it gives each dungeon far more of its own unique character that lacked in the prior games. The number of items is staggering, giving you all sort of attack options and even delving into magic. My favorite was always the Pegasus Boots, since the concept works great in 2D. The secrets are much more plentiful and meaningful. The game is so great that it might still be the pinnacle of 2D Zelda. 

### Honorable Mentions

Super Castlevania IV