# Best Games of 1992

## Bucky O'Hare

_Additional review in 2024 Year in Review_

What? Bucky O’Hare? Well, it’s one of those games that’s always been there for me… not like, emotionally, but it literally was a game that I remember being around as long as I was gaming. Most likely something purchased by an unwitting parent, which is usually a recipe for disaster, but this one turned out to be good. It also overcame the odds of being a licensed game—one of few that possibly supersedes its source material, which I didn’t even know existed in comic book and TV form until years later. You could say this was—again something I wouldn’t understand until later—an early example of me finding a “hidden gem”.

So, to actually talk about the game: basically, it’s Konami taking a stab at a Mega Man game. With the game being structured around run and gun platforming, and an initial round of selectable stages followed by infiltrating the big bad’s base, it is obvious where the comparison comes from. But outside of those superficial similarities, I think most would find that its approach to individual stage design is completely different. While generally not as good as Mega Man—the graphics and music are weaker, you only get four initial stages instead of eight, and the boss/ability design aren’t as ambitious—there is a lot to enjoy here. One cool thing is that instead of gaining abilities after defeating a boss, you rescue a different crew member with their own pros and cons, and can freely switch between all of them. But most of all, without playing this, who knows if I would’ve developed an interest in Mega Man proper, which I didn’t get around to really playing until many years later.

## Sonic the Hedgehog 2

Sonic 2 is a dream sequel to the original, maintaining a lot of the look and feel, but full of obvious improvements. In this era of gaming, two-player in console games often meant simply alternating turns, but Sonic 2 offered not only split-screen, but also simultaneous play! Neither one worked great—split screen was far too laggy and Tails is too limited in single-player mode—but it was worth the effort, still being so uncommon at the time. Plus this doesn’t detract at all from the other great additions, like the spin dash and a new bonus game. I played this game tons back in the day, as even though I didn’t own a Genesis myself, this seemed to be the one game everyone who did have one owned. The water in Chemical Plant Zone stressed me out so much… maybe still does, just a little! Sonic 2 was much better designed and infinitely more memorable than 1, although it does have one frustrating flaw: the final boss battle is ridiculously hard since you get no rings. Most of the time, I give up at that point in the game, but luckily it doesn’t stop you from experiencing all there is to offer.

### Honorable Mentions

Super Mario Kart
