# Best Games of 1993

## The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening

If A Link to the Past is not the pinnacle of 2D Zelda, then Link’s Awakening is its strongest competition. It may have come in a tiny Game Boy cartridge, but this is no pocket-sized adventure. Rivaling the greatest entries in the series, it even expanded on many of the concepts of its SNES predecessor. Underneath the GB limitations, it feels a bit like a hybrid of Zelda 1 and ALttP, with its newer control and design style, but packed into single-screen chunks. One of its biggest strengths is its existential story and oddball characters, straying far from the usual clichés of the series, while keeping the gameplay right at home. Something is absurd yet strangely moving about playing a song to wake a giant whale from an egg.

My biggest annoyances with the game do come from the limitations. While the single-screen design makes for some neat puzzles in the dungeons, it’s not as fun in the overworld, where you often find yourself chasing all the way around a one-block wide obstacle. This is rectified somewhat in the remake, though the obstacles remain, and you can just see beyond them more easily. The constant switching of the buttons is also annoying, and also fixed in the remake. Both version are great ways to enjoy the game, but I put the original on the list since I think you have to give a little more credit there. There is also something very moody about the sparse Game Boy visuals and sound that enhances the atmosphere.

## Mega Man X

The Mega Man X series occupies a weird space in my opinion. Other than having different characters and lore, the gameplay in MMX would’ve been a perfectly natural evolution of the “classic” MM series. Instead, they splintered off into two separate series, and while classic MM would have some small cases of identity crisis (should he charge or slide or not?), the X series instead remained relatively consistent due to the freedom afforded by making X a more upgradable character. MMX is one of the few series that really nailed it on its first go, due to being a spinoff, as it really had several predecessors that its developers had a chance to learn from. Much of the classic MM staples are here: tight run and gun platforming, eight initial bosses with rock-paper-scissors abilities, a persistent villain with a fortress to tackle. 

What sets the X series apart from the classic series is that the character of X has much more flexibility, which gives it a sort of built-in difficulty tuning. You can find permanent upgrades to your health, as well as armor and dashing abilities. The story is a little bit deeper, but… it’s still Mega Man. It’s corny. If you play a Mega Man game for the story, it’s more to make you laugh than think. The “___ Man” Robot Masters are called Mavericks now and instead are usually represented as robot animals. It’s very surface level differences, but there is a definite new feel to the gameplay. While later X games would further expand upon ability upgrades, and give the capability to play as secondary protagonist Zero, something about the first one always resonated more with me. It’s no-frills, which has always been a highlight of the classic series, while providing enough fresh concepts to be fun. Another neat thing is that some of the stages change depending on which order you do them in. It was a bit half-baked, but it was sad to see this largely abandoned in future games rather than refined further. But regardless, the game still plays great and is an essential in any Mega Man enthusiast’s collection.

### Honorable Mentions

Doom