# Best Games of 1994

## Donkey Kong Country

Donkey Kong Country was a staple of visits to my friend’s house. A perfect game for two-player mode, its big innovation over Super Mario World was that you had the option to switch off between players mid-level rather than between levels. Of course, more than this, we were all fixated on the graphics, which were sort of a teaser for the 3D games that were on the horizon. Perhaps so fixated we didn’t notice that it was otherwise a pretty standard 2D platformer—maybe even a little bit below standard, when compared to games like Mario and Sonic. Nonetheless, while it might be overly simple in terms of level design, it’s inoffensive; frustration is rare outside of a few difficulty spikes and some wonky collision detection. It’s not as fun to thoroughly explore as later games, but I do still enjoy giving it a quick run-through every once in a while. The graphics and music still hold up as a highlight; the jungle and snow levels in particular are some of my favorite visuals of the SNES trilogy. And of course, Rare breathed a lot of new life and personality into a series that felt like a relic at the time, showcasing their trademark humor that would define a lot of Nintendo fans’ childhoods in the 90s.

## Sonic 3 and Knuckles

Though I often see Sonic 2 cited as the best classic Sonic game, for me, it’s this one, no question. The best thing about Sonic 3 is that it finally delivered us a save game option. I realize this is not really a big deal now, when most probably aren’t playing this on a Genesis cartridge anymore, but it made the game far more approachable. Remember, playing these games as a kid, it wasn’t easy to get a lot of uninterrupted time, especially when I didn’t own my own game and had to play it at a friend’s house. Playing a game in one sitting was a tough task. The other positive side effect of adding saves is that there was no reason for the game to have permanent game overs anymore, further adding to its accessibility.

Okay, so what does that have to do with anything? Sure, these things could be said about a few games on this list, but I felt like it was something worth mentioning at some point, and in this case I don’t have a ton to say about the game itself. Even without the save factor, I think this would still be my favorite just for also having more characters, more bonuses and more power-ups than before. It’s even double-sized! Maybe that is cheating a bit, but through Sega’s remarkable lock-on technology, they were able to make Sonic 3 and Knuckles two games in one. And considering it is widely regarded/originally intended as a single game, that’s how I’m counting it too.

## Final Fantasy VI (III)

Growing up, I was never really a big RPG fan—I wasn’t against them per se, but it wasn’t a genre that landed on my radar (probably due to not owning the big RPG consoles of the time, the SNES and PS1). One of many games on this list first introduced to me via the SNES Classic—and my first Final Fantasy—I could see why FF6 is often seen as the pinnacle of 2D FF games. Though at times some things feel dated, mainly the translation, they also add to the charm and mystique. I get an indescribable feeling playing classic JRPGs, which capture ideas and themes that are a mix of both foreign and familiar. 

The very core plot of FF6—madman tries to take over the world—is very simple, but there is far more to it than that. It’s about the characters you meet along the way, learning about the various factions and how they got to this point, and the crazy setpieces (everyone who has played this knows _that_ one particular famous scene). Compared to many of the more cheery, simple-minded games on this list, it explores darker themes like war, death and nihilism. With a huge ensemble cast, sometimes I admittedly lose track of the significance of everyone’s story, but the big cast gives you a lot of options. Everyone has some unique ability they can take advantage of, and over time they can also be trained up in magic. While I doubt big RPG fans would say it’s the deepest or most refined gameplay, for someone like me who had mainly played RPGs like Pokemon and Paper Mario to that point, it was fun to experiment with all of it. Oh and that soundtrack. You gotta talk about the soundtrack. I had first heard Dancing Mad outside of the game and thought it must be a remix, I was floored that this was something produced by a SNES. The whole game is full of amazing tracks, quirky moments, and… well it’s just one that needs to be played to really understand.

## Super Metroid

Though not the first Metroid game, this is undeniably the true template. It was so good there would eventually be an entire genre named (half) after Metroid, and it’s easy to see why. Pretty much all the conventions that have endured to this day were already here in 1994: the in-game map, the upgrade loops and the sequence-breaking potential. This standard-bearer may to this day still be the best of the bunch. Super Metroid keeps it simple compared to similar games with more RPG elements, but that’s what makes it great. You might rarely find an exciting new weapon, but you won’t find an underwhelming one either—the missile tanks will always be useful. It satisfies two of my biggest impulses when playing a game: character upgrades and exploration. Now of course these two elements are common to many games, but it’s the way they are intertwined in Super Metroid that is special. 

There are no artificial obstacles along the way or pushy helper characters; you are left to figure it out. There are certainly more ideal ways to go, but that’s part of the fun, looking at the world’s subtle cues while not even knowing that you are being directed. And of course, there are still plenty of times I end up going the wrong way. You will hit obstacles in this game, but players more skilled than me have found a way to get through it in nearly every way imaginable.  Even if you don’t have that kind of skill, the adventurous will never get truly stuck as long as they are smart and persistent. I did hit a few brief choke points my first time through, but in comparison to the first Metroid game, it is far more forgiving in this regard without being obvious. 

Like all Metroid games, the lonely alien world atmosphere is here and adds to the experience. More than just an empty world you will see damaged and abandoned locations, leaving clues to interpret their past. More mature and serious than your average Nintendo game, it’s always a joy to go back and explore it.