# Best Games of 1995

## EarthBound

There’s more than meets the eye with this quirky tale about a bunch of children going around suburban America. Another game that feels out of place in the typical Nintendo fare, the Shigesato Itoi-helmed RPG, like Metroid, does have its fair share of mature themes. You meet a cult with allusions to the KKK and delve into Ness’ psyche. The final boss is… something. It is punctuated by a lot of humor, however—sometimes gently dark humor that reflects this maturity, like Ness’ overworked father only being seen as a phone. There are plenty of pop culture references and puns throughout.

Initially I disliked the lack of battle animations, but eventually grew to appreciate them. Having your battles described in writing conveys the absurdity of fighting a piece of abstract art better than animations would. Much of the game is standard RPG fare for the time: you engage in turn-based battles where you can attack, use an item or use magic; and over the course of the game they get more complicated. You go around town to town along the way, getting better weapons, doing some peculiar sidequest for someone. Of course, as is often the case with RPGs, it’s more about the story and characters, and in this case humor. There are still some unique battle mechanics, like the rolling health meters, which can really add a lot of tension. I also appreciated the way weak enemies just get wiped out instantly, instead of wasting your time loading a battle screen. Thankfully this game, though rare in its original form, was brought to the attention of much wider audiences so I could experience it.

## Donkey Kong Country 2

Though it usually scores high marks, I can’t help but always feel like DKC2 is a bit overlooked. Perhaps this reflects my own experience a bit: I played a ton of the first as a kid, but never even knew there was a second one until I approached adulthood. Maybe some of the issue is that it looks a lot like 1 visually, but can you blame Rare? Everyone loved the pre-rendered graphics! And the similar visuals and engine no doubt helped them to get this out just a year later, but in spite of all that, it is a different game entirely.

About the only questionable decision here was to toss out Donkey Kong, but Dixie Kong is fun to play as in her own right. Everything else was a big improvement. The level design is totally overhauled, with you moving in directions other than to the right, and all the new game mechanics that come with added verticality. Instead of feeling tacked on, animal buddies are essential to some levels, and helpful in finding secrets in others. The secrets are much better as well—better telegraphed (albeit some can still be pretty obtuse), better designed, and with purpose! They added an entire bonus world that you can only complete by finding all the secrets, which even culminates in a special boss fight and true ending. Speaking of which… yeah, the bosses are better too, being more level-appropriate as well as requiring much more dynamic approaches to defeat. Overall the game just plays better too, with little things like collision detection improved. Lastly, they somehow upped the ante with the soundtrack even more. If you enjoy the first DKC, it’s mandatory to play this one.

## Super Mario World 2: Yoshi's Island

Donkey Kong Country not only got a sequel, but its own answer from Nintendo. Or so the story goes, with Yoshi’s Island’s childlike art style supposedly being a cheeky response to the popularity over DKC’s graphics. Unfortunately the Yoshi series would later take being for children a little bit too much to heart, but Yoshi’s first go at the starring role in a platformer was a mighty fine game.

The marketing of this game, particularly in the West, was a bit confusing, as it capitalizes on the Mario name, but goes in its own direction. Though still a platformer of course, and with some of the conventions you’d expect from Mario, its main distinction is being focused more around exploration than speed. The timers and thousands-high scoreboards are gone, instead presenting a sequence of levels where various collectibles are hidden throughout. Generally speaking, the objective is still to beat a series of levels, but if you collect everything for the perfect 100 score, you can unlock more bonuses and extra levels. Admittedly, since the levels are bigger and slower-paced, I don’t find as many things stick out in my mind compared to traditional Mario, even despite Yoshi’s Island having fewer levels overall. And it can be tedious to go back for 100 scores since you need to recollect everything, not just what you missed before. But the game is a lot of fun as a change of pace for your familiar faces, with some cool transformations, nice music and a difficulty level that’s not insulting. 