# Best Games of 1996

## Kirby Super Star

I have to admit I’m not the biggest fan of Kirby, viewing it as more of a third- or fourth-tier Nintendo franchise, but it felt like it belonged somewhere, and Super Star is my favorite. Though boasting 8 games in one, many are very short, but it still offers enough in the way of more substantial experiences. A big weakness of Kirby is the lack of difficulty, and KSS is not particularly hard either, but it leans into some concepts that help make up for it. Compared to prior entries, it plays a bit like a stylized beat-em-up than a pure platformer, and the flashy animations and variety of abilities give excitement that mask the simplicity. The addition of co-op was huge—I think part of the appeal of Kirby is you can bring more inexperienced gamers along for the ride, without them being dead weight like they might be in more challenging games.

So a lot of this could be said for future Kirby games as well, but I think KSS gets points for figuring out this formula first, and also maintaining more variety. Later entries would play it a bit safe, keeping some of these ideas, but falling into the traditional platforming mold a bit too much. The KSS modes aren’t super ambitious, but they play to the Kirby series’ strengths and weaknesses well: Great Cave Offensive puts emphasis on non-linear exploration; Revenge of Meta-Knight adds a bit of tension and excitement with a timer; and Milky Way Wishes gives a (slight) taste of being deprived of Kirby’s iconic copy ability. 

## Duke Nukem 3D

Most people think of Doom as the foremost FPS of the pre-Goldeneye, pre-Half-Life days, and while they are probably right to think so, I always bet on Duke. Now some of this does come down to availability, as despite the fact that everything runs Doom, in the 90s that wasn’t quite the case, plus I was a kid without a lot of money. At some point I ended up with the N64 port of Duke3D, and there was no Doom N64 port (although there was of course a Doom 64, a different game), so there you have it. I was aware of Doom and admired it from afar, but even if I played it more at the time, I might have still gravitated towards Duke.

Why? Sure Doom had the blood, but Duke had blood, babes _and_ badass attitude. It was of course a perfectly alluring game for a pre-adolescent boy. Mere graphic violence was fairly common by this point, but the rest was not, and gave it an extra forbidden fruit quality, even with the watered-down N64 version. Nowadays I’d like to think I’m generally above such things, or at least they aren’t of primary concern in picking out a game, but it’s regardless just fun to play. It does have some of the pitfalls of early FPS—obtuse secrets, confusing maps and just generally high difficulty—but those are also the things that make these fun to go back to. In contrast to Doom, you also have a higher range of motion and the ability to look freely. I’m not sure if it was the first FPS to have free aiming, but it’s easy to take for granted now that it wasn’t there from the start. And of course, loaded with pop culture references and irreverent humor, I’m sure I’d still notice a few new things if I were to go back to it.

## Super Mario 64

Super Mario 64 might be the only game on this list that is the reverse of the nostalgic favorite. I played this game as a kid, but I didn’t enjoy it a ton. What’s weird is I can’t think of a game I would’ve played before that attempted a free camera, yet even at my young age, the camera in SM64 struck me as insufficient. Many years later, after seeing a lot of takes on the internet about the brilliance of the camera, it clicked with me… somewhat. It can still be a pain, but it basically was the first game to do it, so it deserves some slack. I also realized that the less you try to control it manually the better, and just let it do its thing… but wait, this isn’t a tips column, is it?

My other dissatisfaction as a child was that it felt like a departure from the Mario gameplay I had come to know. What I had envisioned was something like what eventually did become 3D Land/World, so that also has raised SM64 in my rankings—not because those other ones are bad, but just because I can appreciate SM64 for what it is. Not to mention it helped launch a platforming formula that would more or less provide a template for many other games I enjoy. 

I will always stand by my opinion that the game is pretty ugly, even by N64 standards, and doesn’t always control great (wall jumps are a good example of this), but there’s just something about playing it where I can’t deny anymore that it’s a true classic. 

### Honorable Mentions

Super Mario RPG

Pokemon Red/Blue/Green/Yellow