# Best Games of 1997

## Final Fantasy VII

Another one I was very late to the party on, it’s nonetheless undeniable why this is an all-time classic. Much of the game itself is not so timeless, namely the pre-rendered backgrounds, weird translation and some odd gameplay moments. When I played this, comparisons to FF6 came to mind, and this is one of those cases where a late 2D game occasionally outshines an early 3D game. It can be at times difficult to parse where to go in FF7 (even with the markers), and it’s stuffed with so many mini-games and pseudo-QTEs that sometimes add to the charm but often just don’t really work. However, I enjoyed the Materia system much more than the comparable Espers from FF6, and the battle screens look decent for the time, particularly with summons.

But the most striking jump made here was in tone and maturity. Your heroes swear and commit acts of terrorism. The main character, Cloud, fights less for justice and more for his own past. Avalanche fights for justice… aggressively, with consequences, both direct and as a result of Shinra’s exploitation of public opinion. It raises questions that apply to our real world, like what is a justifiable cost for progress and industrialization? Is peaceful resistance to corporate oppression possible in a world where complacency is rampant? 

And of course there is so much more… occasionally the story gets a bit convoluted, and some goofy things happen, but it’s a big journey with so many twists and turns. Like with FF6, I have difficulty remembering it all, but I just know it’s one of those games that makes me _feel_ something as I’m playing it. It’s a stellar example of the unique storytelling potential of video games.

## Mario Kart 64

Somehow I did not know this game existed for a long time, even though Mario Kart is one of the best selling franchises. To be fair, this was only the second one at the time. I was playing Diddy Kong Racing instead, which arguably deserves this spot for having a much more comprehensive single-player mode. The reason I went with MK instead? Because most people, unlike me, do know it much better than DKR. My generation in particular loves MK64, and even 10+ years after release, this was such a staple of college gaming sessions that I think it has to go on the list. There’s not much to say here—everyone knows how MK works, and this isn’t exactly the most advanced one, but it’s fun enough in spite of its flaws. Even if it’s not the best MK by any stretch it does have one power: bringing people together. And it holds up much better than a certain other millennial N64 favorite from this year (see the HM).

## Castlevania: Symphony of the Night

This is where the “vania” in Metroidvania comes from, although I’ve always felt the “Metroid” part does the heavy lifting. Symphony of the Night didn’t bring a whole lot of new things to the table other than the RPG elements. As alluded to in my Super Metroid review, this means that instead of picking up permanent upgrades, you get various weapons and armors that give you various stat boosts. Of course stats are also boosted through standard experience grinding that’s common in RPGs. The whole thing makes exploring a bit more of a crapshoot, although there is a certain whimsy to a lot of the items. You do also get the chance to find things that are a bit more interesting, like familiars that will follow you around.

Much of the map in this game is confusing. There aren’t as many clearly telegraphed paths as in Super Metroid, and the whole second half of the game largely eschews the item-based progression, turning into one big task of filling out the map. Then there’s the confusing final objectives which involve picking up various objects to get the true ending. But I’m probably making this sound much worse than it is. Fortunately, the game is very forgiving with its difficulty, turning the notoriously hard series on its head. It still requires caution due to a dated save system, but it certainly eases the pain of what can turn into aimless wandering.

Now I’m again sounding more like a negative review, but this game is very fun. It cannot be understated how much the coolness factor elevates Castlevania. Alucard is a suitable badass, and the control is so much snappier than Classicvania, even if I do sometimes miss the whipping (but playing as Richter is a fun bonus mode!). I love seeing what kind of enemies and settings they come up with—somehow they always seem to put a fresh twist on their own clichés. There is a lot of quirky fun stuff too, like the voice acting, the shopkeeper and strange rooms like the confession booth. I’m grateful for its influence on the genre, even if said influence is often overstated.

## StarFox 64

I’m pretty sure this was the first N64 game I ever played. I could’ve sworn it was sold in a bundle with the console, but I can’t find any evidence of such a thing existing. Regardless, I know at least the game itself was definitely bundled with the Rumble Pak, making it a hot ticket item. It turns out, the Rumble Pak was mostly just an undercooked gimmick, but fortunately they included a great game with it!

SF64 is one of those games that proves a great game transcends genre. I think I’m far from the only fan of it who doesn’t really play on-rails shooters in general. Perhaps only due to a combination of the Rumble Pak as well as the N64’s general lack of top-shelf games, I’m glad it came into my hands either way. A true “easy to beat but difficult to master” game, I’ve had countless fun exploring the different routes and trying to beat my scores. I don’t even want to admit how many tries it took me to finally get all of the medals (but to be fair… I was under 10 years old). I’m not even sure I ever got them all on Expert mode! It really tests your abilities, but you can push your limits in this game on normal just figuring out the best way to ration your bombs and charge shots. 

This might also be the first Nintendo game to attempt full voice acting, something that they still to this day hesitate with. I don’t need to get into the memes of course, but this thing is just sprinkled with quotes I still think of after playing so much. The acting isn’t great, but it’s not at a level of “so bad it’s good” either… it’s somewhere between corny and good, but all I know is I can’t get enough. You might say when it comes to quoting StarFox, I CAN’T STOP IIIIIT!

### Honorable Mentions

Mega Man X4

Goldeneye

Diddy Kong Racing