# Best Games of 1988

## The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time

Along with Final Fantasy 7, it feels like Ocarina of Time practically invented the “Best Game Ever” discourse—not necessarily as a testament to their unprecedented quality, but the combined maturations of games journalism, internet discussion and the industry itself reaching a point where it was a valid question. Regardless, coming in with a decent respect of its predecessors (not just in Zelda but gaming as a whole), when OoT dropped I fell in love pretty much instantly, and it remained my single favorite game for a long time after. There was just one foundation-shaking innovation after another. I don’t know if OoT invented all of these things, but I think it popularized them for many people who, like me, experienced them for the first time through it: a rolling day-night system, horseback riding, Z-targeting. I remember reading about “Zelda 64” in a gaming magazine, in its early stages, being enticed by the teases of the day-night shift and your horse. It felt like a dose of realism I couldn’t wait to see. 

And those weren’t even the most memorable parts of the game in the end. OoT is fundamentally great because it’s built on a strong formula established mainly in A Link to the Past. But this is not to say that it is lacking in uniqueness, as the dungeons were unlike anything I had seen before, and I was invested in a 3D world in a way that 3D games to that point didn’t achieve. I don’t even think I fully grasped it at the time, but the most understated achievement is its immersive story. While games like FF7 have a much more ambitious story, OoT was equally effective at eliciting an emotional response from me by pulling me more directly into the action. It was the first game I had played that had a cinematic direction to key scenes. This is an interesting contrast of the technology at the time—PS1 games typically opted for FMVs, which were much flashier, but often pulled you of the game with live-action actors or CG that didn’t match the style of the game. I don’t say this to knock the PS1, or say that OoT is to credit for the popularization of in-engine cutscenes, but it was a great example of Nintendo using the system’s weaknesses as a positive.

Due to how I was pulled into the world, OoT was also the first game where I really wanted to explore everything, see what every minor character was up to, find every little secret. It’s brimming with so much life and mystique; a tiny glimpse at the ultimate potential of open-world adventure, but also a fantastic experience that still stands wholly on its own.

## Banjo-Kazooie

Banjo-Kazooie is another game that came to my attention through a gaming magazine. Having a bear that carries a bird around in a backpack is just one of those mad genius ideas so brilliant that I had felt like I already knew these now-beloved and iconic characters before I picked up the game. I was nearly eight years old when the game came out, but it feels weird to remember there was a part of my life that didn’t have Banjo and Kazooie in it. This might be Rare at the height of their powers, in terms of creating a world that hits the exact right amount of challenge, characters, charm and humor. BK feels like one of those games that was made specifically _for me_, yet clearly I’m not its only fan.

I wasn’t sold on the 3D platform genre yet, as evidenced by my Mario 64 review, but this one is what I dreamed that Mario could be, even though now I see the two games as being pretty distinct from one another. Banjo doesn’t have as many worlds overall, but they are more strikingly themed, filled out with funny characters and big concepts. One world, as everyone who’s played it would obviously remember, is based around the four seasons. And who could forget that quiz show ending? Grunty’s Lair was ominously fun, a growing tower of terror. The transformations were a great touch. It’s just really hard for me to say anything bad about BK. While it’s less ambitious than other Rare collectathons, that means it’s much more restrained as well. And let’s face it, not every objective in a collection platformer is always a winner, even in the best of them—but by keeping it simple with their first go at it, Rare ensured that the great moments always outshine the dull ones.

## StarCraft

I was never great at StarCraft, but it was fun anyway, with its diverse race options, memorable voice lines and CG cutscenes. Luckily, it had a huge support base of user-created content. But wait, didn’t I say no user content on here? Well in SC, it was more like a level editor, so I think that’s different. Actually, I believe it even came with a level editor, though it probably isn’t what everyone used to make maps. More importantly, the ability to play user-created maps was a stock part of the game, no mods required.

So yeah, even if I couldn’t get super into playing SC the proper way, there was an endless amount of fun variants that still provided a great taste of the game’s unit mechanics. I think it actually introduced me to the concept of tower defense games, which were always my favorite, but there are all kinds of possibilities; I remember one that was based on Pac-Man. I need not get too much into what users would make, as that’s outside of the bounds of what the game actually delivered to us, but the key takeaway here is Blizzard making it very easy to access user content. And of course there’s also a great RTS with a lot of depth that comes with it, if that’s your thing.

## Mario Party

Mario Party has never been an exemplar of Nintendo’s typical quality: the graphics don’t particularly stand out, many weird design choices have been made over the years and fundamentally the game just has way too much basis on luck. But anyone who has played a significant amount of any MP game knows that it’s less about the game itself and its purpose as a way to get people together to play something. You have to know not to take it too seriously and expect some ridiculous garbage to happen and just ride along. 

The first one almost certainly is not the best, but it definitely isn’t the worst either. I’ve played enough of 2 and 3 (and not many others) to say they’d rank higher in a vacuum, but number 1 gets the spot for simply being the one I played most. Not every entry on this list is a paragon of the medium’s power; many are just a source of simple, dumb fun, and this one is probably the dumbest. That being said, the mini-games do provide some nice variety, even if you see them all pretty quickly, and can get past the over-reliance on button-mashing and stick-rotating. There is still a small element of strategy and it can be satisfying to pull off a successful star steal or a clutch mini-game win. The various bonuses and unlockables do take a decent amount of effort to achieve. These early MP games also have some unintentionally hilarious voice samples, mainly for Luigi and Wario, which provided me a great deal of amusement.