# Best Games of 1999

## Super Smash Bros.

I remember having no idea what this was when it came out. There was a corny ad where people in Nintendo character mascot suits beat each other up. Little did I know that this would go on to be one of the most legendary gaming ads of all time, or that it was a pretty literal advertisement for the game. Ads in the 90s were generally weird enough that you couldn’t really glean much from their content.* Even though it would go on to spawn a massive series, the original Smash was more a weird experiment. 

From the start, they hit on some good fundamentals that would ensure the series’ success. I’ve never been a big fighting game fan, but the Smash control scheme was so much more accessible than the weirdo combos and special moves of your traditional fighting games. Instead of depleting HP in a simple 2D arena, you knocked each other around (and eventually out) in varying arenas with all kinds of sloped terrain, platforms and hazards. And of course there’s a roster of pre-existing characters, some iconic and some not-so iconic, but definitely enough that Nintendo fans love, even in the first game’s quaint count of 12.
Most of the formula was there from the start, but Smash 64 is missing one big thing from its successors: polish. It’s hard to believe after seeing how detailed the series would become, but the first game is pretty janky. Many of the character models, like Mario, DK and Link, look worse than in previous N64 games they already appeared in. A lot of items and effects are 2D sprites. And overall, it feels pretty floaty and slow. But it’s still a lot of fun, and still the Smash game that I’m personally the most skilled at, which means I win at it more, and winning makes me feel better about myself.

*I watched the ad now and the game is explained both in the narration and gameplay footage, but an eight year old doesn’t notice those things!

## RollerCoaster Tycoon

RollerCoaster Tycoon might be the first game I played (though certainly not the first to exist chronologically) that convinced me that PC gaming occupied its own space with certain advantages over console gaming. The “tycoon” genre, involving simulated management at a large scale, is one of those that begs to be played with a mouse and keyboard. Given it had been around a while, most famously with SimCity, it’s a bit of a surprise that RCT was my major introduction to it. I’m not a big fan of rollercoasters in real life, and of course it’s a game out of my wheelhouse in general. I think it might have been my non-gaming dad, of all people, who took notice (in a PC magazine or something?). RCT also could be retroactively considered an indie game, being mostly designed and developed by one person, so it’s just an all-around surprise. 

Perhaps the way it got into so many hands is because it’s just so good, and word-of-mouth spreads. Even if you don’t love amusement parks, most people are at least familiar with them, and probably like at least one part of them. If you hate standing in lines and experiencing high g-forces in questionable harnessing, then it’s a lot more fun to watch a virtual vomit-inducing rollercoaster. Even better is when you _created_ that coaster. I remember I’d try to build as big of a drop as the game would allow, though not intentionally as an extreme coaster, as my young mind only understood loops to be “extreme”. The game keeps you grounded with its objectives, and it’s a nice balance of the management aspects and the fun of ride design. Of course, that didn’t stop a ton of people from messing around and making high powered death coasters. Not me though. _Definitely_ not me.

## Jet Force Gemini

As we close out the 90’s, it’s fitting that Jet Force Gemini was a game that barely fits in this decade. It’s hard to believe that in 1999, the third person shooter genre hardly existed, and certainly had no gold standard. JFG, to be clear, was not a gold standard, but it might have just been too ahead of its time! Well, except for its advertising campaign, which I remember coming in… a VHS tape in the mail. I believe Rare also did this for DKC, but this was the first and only time I can remember getting a video tape of a game. I’m not even sure why; could be a result of a gaming magazine subscriber list, but I don’t think we ever asked for it.

Granted, as I write about it now, it doesn’t feel that advanced, but games with space travel always seem more futuristic. The planet-hopping element was fun, even if it was just a glorified world map, as there are no playable travel sequences. More impressive was the character-hopping, which maybe isn’t the most novel idea, but still tends to get under-utilized in gaming to this day. Of course there is a downside to the repetition, but it was also a lot of fun getting to approach levels in a new way and use each character’s special abilities to unlock new parts. Unfortunately it was beholden to the bizarre N64 controller, but it played pretty well for what they were working with. Shooting strange looking guns at giant bugs is just fun. 

The soundtrack to the game is incredible, and it’s full of little side missions and easter eggs. The limited Floyd co-op was a neat idea. Most of all, it’s just a lot of fun to go to the varying planets. The game does get bogged down by Rare’s overzealous collecting they loved at that time, but luckily most of the places you visit throughout the journey are fun to come back to. This is a game I’ve always wished would get a proper remake or remaster, as it just needs a little tighter shooting mechanics. It could have been a classic, but I still love it personally, and it was another example of Rare’s constant ambition in the era.

### Honorable Mentions

Tony Hawk's Pro Skater