# Best Games of 2000

## Command and Conquer: Red Alert 2

Red Alert 2 was not my first Command and Conquer game, but it was the one where things really clicked for me. Though dated today, the quality of the visuals as well as the infamously cheesy cutscenes were a huge upgrade from RA1. Of course, Tiberian Sun was released in between that time, so there was a lot of room for iteration. While not as well received overall as StarCraft, I always enjoyed something more about playing RA2. Unfortunately it also did not have nearly as robust of an online either, and in the dial-up days, playing this online was a nightmare. Nevertheless, I had countless fun beating up on the computers, I believe even working my way up to winning 1v7 against the hardest difficulty.

The AI in this game was not great, and eventually predictable as you learned its tendencies, but that only seemed to make it more fun for me. It was less about deep strategy and instead about seeing all of the different ways I could launch my final assaults on the opponent. I loved that you could steal intel from the enemy and be able to build units from another faction. Each country having its own special unit added to the replay value, and then an entire new faction was introduced with the expansion. It’s not the deepest RTS out there, but it’s undoubtedly a lot of fun.

## The Sims

Evidently, 2000 was a big year for me enjoying PC games published by EA. Of course, this one really needs no explanation. The Sims might be the only game I can think of where I all but gave up on playing without using cheats. Who knew that it would be so realistic to play the “right” way: spending way too much time at a job that never gets you enough money to do all the fun stuff you want. The effectively infinite money cheat was a godsend, since to me the most fun part of the game was designing a huge home. Interacting with the Sims was of course a lot of fun too, though this entry was pretty limited. I got my mileage out of it, but I remember always longing for things like more customization options, online play and romance options that weren’t a random guessing game. I always though it was kind of funny how you could have a family with children, but to my recollection there was no way to romantically link people until you played through the game. So all these households have two bachelor(ette)s cohabiting with some random children? Whose children are they?

I assume a lot of these things were fixed in the sequels, although oddly enough, I never really played any of them. Perhaps there was some fatigue from seeing store shelves filled with seemingly endless expansion packs for the first game—which of course, I occasionally bit the bullet on. In the early 2000s, when my gaming budget was much thinner, The Sims was a great one to eat up time with, but then I moved on. It did contribute a lot to the proliferation of the life sim genre, and I’ve enjoyed a handful of the different takes on it since.

## The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask

Living in a post-Ocarina of Time world, naturally it put my expectations for the Zelda series into the stratosphere. Perhaps I should have tempered expectations a bit, but don’t worry, Majora’s Mask will get its due praise. Following up what I had considered the best game ever, at the time of release, I was a little put off by the way MM takes a different direction. Since then, of course, it has risen considerably in my view, and ironically its deviation from OoT is actually what makes it a better Zelda game than its successors (until BotW) in my eyes. Initially seeming familiar, with many character assets lifted straight out of OoT, many things understandably threw off 9 year old me. Operating under a time limit led to some frustrating moments when you narrowly miss out on a certain quest (and still is a flaw to this day in my opinion, but perhaps a necessary one). I had considered the adventure far less “epic”, saving some mysterious town from a weird masked… Skull Kid? A random minor NPC from the previous game? And of course, the number of dungeons was greatly reduced.

All of this I came to realize over time is what’s brilliant about it. Compared to release cycles today, it would be a dream to see a sequel of this caliber only a year and a half later, and it’s aided largely by a lot of clever design. The reused assets give way to a parallel world concept, and the operation of events on a repeating schedule allow the world to feel bigger than it is. Link’s journey is much more about the stories of the individuals he meets along the way. The diminutive villain is a testament to the power of the mask, showing that anyone can be consumed by evil. The dungeons are far more polished and lack the tutorial filler of OoT, giving you great bang for your buck with only four. And it’s not fair to compare the two games without crediting a lot of the great new stuff added in MM: geographical areas that feel super fresh, more complicated sidequests and of course, transformation masks. I’ve gone on to replay MM several times and always enjoy this essential Zelda experience.

## Perfect Dark

I’m guilty of slightly resenting how everyone always remembers GoldenEye. While I did play a small amount of it back in the day, I never owned it at the time, and ended up pretty much skipping over it entirely for this spiritual sequel. The expansion pak-enhanced Perfect Dark amped up the action with a cool futuristic setting, aliens and a huge arsenal of weapons that still rivals many shooters to this day. Not only that, but you have an interactive hub world that contains fun bonuses like a shooting range, multiplayer challenges, and the addition of multiplayer bots. I don’t even want to admit how many hours I’ve devoted to slaughtering MeatSims with friends. The weapons had so many interesting effects and secondary modes. It was extremely annoying, but also funny to dole out the “drunk” effect from weapons like the tranquilizer and crossbow. You had your one-hit kill guns of course. There was a sniper gun that could x-ray through walls; a rocket launcher you could fly remotely; a machine gun with a 120 round magazine. Gadgets let you cloak or slow down time. 

The campaign works much like GoldenEye, with missions that have no checkpoints, where you have to complete a set of objectives that depend on difficulty. I loved the way there are fail states, like if you kill civilians, or get caught at the wrong time. The way that different difficulty levels occasionally change the structure of the level adds a lot of replay value, as do the unlockable cheats. Completing the levels in time for the cheats was so hard I never even unlocked many of them, but I did persevere through a good amount since a lot of the cheats were worth it, like blazing through the campaign with a full arsenal. It’s a shame that the control scheme is so dated, even with modern ports, because it’s absolutely worth going back to today to see all the novel concepts, including many I didn’t have room to list here.

### Honorable Mentions

Banjo-Tooie

Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 2