# Best Games of 2001

## Super Smash Bros. Melee

I would consider the first Super Smash Bros a surprise hit, so it was expected for Melee to be _good_, but it surprised again by being a complete masterpiece. The experimental dents from the first game were completely worked away, turning this series into a highly polished love letter to Nintendo. Though model viewers have become more common in games now, I remember staring at the trophies in awe at some of the details they managed to include (of course not realizing at the time that many were likely lifted from the models where they are actually used in gameplay). Aside from the new sheen, this is really just a massive expansion of the original game: more fighters, more stages, more music tracks, etc. The trend of weird character choices continued, but it’s hard to deny that it’s fun when an oddball selection, such as Mr. Game & Watch, hits the mark.

The competitive nuances of Smash never really concerned a middling player such as me, but there was something that really felt good about Melee. Of course, many of my feelings around Smash games depend on what age I was when they came out, and in Melee’s case I got plenty of multiplayer time in. For what it’s worth, even though it isn’t exactly the main draw of Smash, I think Melee was the pinnacle of Smash single player. Boasting 25 characters, it was just the right amount to make modes like break the targets and all-stars feasible. I loved all of the new content added compared to the first game, like the event matches, multi-man melee and of course home run contest. Then there’s the aforementioned trophies that are just fun to look at. All of that stuff would be enough for a great game on its own, but as all Smash goes, if you grab the right group of friends you’ll never run out of fun things to do in it.

## Grand Theft Auto III

I’m not sure when the term “open world” came into use—it feels like a recent thing, yet I’ve seen it applied (retroactively?) to games as old as the original Zelda. Even the now-dated “sandbox” feels too recent for GTA3. Regardless, even if we didn’t know what to call it, we knew this progenitor of the modern open-world game was different. Sure, there were non-linear games with a big world, but those worlds were usually something of a hub between various towns and dungeons. In GTA, instead you were in one continuous (albeit segmented) zone; the overworld isn’t where you go between the action, it _is_ the action. While the main missions were a bit straightforward and unlock in a linear fashion, the map is dotted with all kinds of secret collectibles and side missions, down to even ad-hoc ones like the taxis and ambulances, being tied to a vehicle rather than a particular location. 

When I was a kid playing this, the most fun to me was no mission at all: pumping the game full of cheats and going on a criminal rampage, or perhaps trying some cool driving stunts, or trying to get past the barriers between islands. This was the promise of an open-world game, that it lets you take your time, do things your own way, but entice you with just enough rewards to get you to nibble away at the main content. Structurally, a lot of this was already present in the first two GTA games, which I had actually played prior to 3’s release. But the top-down nature of those already felt dated in the PS1 era, so GTA3 was also a strong endorsement of the then-next-generation, helping to fully realize this into 3D.

## Halo: Combat Evolved

I don’t remember exactly how Halo and Xbox came onto my radar. Obviously it goes without saying that this is the game that made Xbox, but the console was still an unknown newcomer (albeit with a huge brand backing it). I do remember that we got an Xbox for Christmas in possibly 2003 because there was a decent priced (non-Halo) bundle. At whatever point we ended up getting Halo, it was pretty clear why it was the king of Xbox. PC LAN nerds will probably scoff at my naivete, but this was where I was introduced to system link. Playing with more than four people was amazing! So was having less split screen (especially back when a 32 inch TV was considered big). Having released before Xbox Live launched, this was initially the proper way to get the Halo multiplayer experience. It probably still is, though I can’t act like the slow death of local multiplayer has only affected Halo.

The single player wasn’t as big of a draw to me, but still had plenty of memorable moments. Coming off Perfect Dark as my heavily played FPS, the generational jump to Halo was a wonder to behold. The scope of some of the levels felt so enormous (thanks to some loading tricks) and performance was slick. Halo marked a big turning point in FPS design, with the two-weapon system and regeneration based health. While those elements don’t always get put to good use in games, I never really had a problem with them in Halo. The scale of conflict and involvement of multiple factions also added to the mystique of this new universe. Piloting vehicles for combat was a new concept to me, and one that games struggle to this day to do as well as Halo. Even the Halo series itself now struggles with what direction it wants to take, but not until after propping up Xbox in the early days.

## Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3

You may have already noticed two Tony Hawk games making the HMs on this list in the two previous years. You know, writing this list has furthered underscored to me how much less we had to wait for sequels back in the day. In the case of THPS, it’s not as surprising, given they were all pretty similar. Luckily, the first game laid a great foundation for its addicting and deceptively simple gameplay of chaining ridiculous skate trick combos and completing bizarre tasks. Any of the first three rank about equally to me, but I put 3 down since most of the iterative additions were good. Eventually, THPS  proved to be too much of a good thing—though 4 enjoyed success, I never played it much, with the series fatigue settling in a bit earlier for me, and afterward it seemed to hit a negative turning point.

Nonetheless, I had a lot of fun with the series for a time, and eventually it righted the ship with the solid _second_ combined remaster of 1 + 2. And even as an outsider to the skating subculture, there was something cool about seeing how it impacted Tony Hawk, skateboarding and the extreme sports video game genre. Maybe it’s _because_ those things don’t interest me that I admire THPS so much: in a similar category as RollerCoaster Tycoon and StarFox 64, it proves that any subject matter or genre can make for a great game when put in the right hands.

### Honorable Mentions

The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages/Seasons

Castlevania: Circle of the Moon

Paper Mario
