# Best Games of 2002

## RollerCoaster Tycoon 2

I have to admit I was a bit hesitant about including this on the list, as it feels more like a third expansion pack to the first game. Most of what I would say about this has already been said about number 1. Of course it has the obligatory new rides, new parks, new decorations, etc., but it still plays out more or less the same, and even looks similar. The big thing I remember about RCT2 is that it included real world Six Flags parks. While most people would probably be interested in seeing the digital recreations of the parks they know, for me I dreamed of the reverse: someday visiting the parks in real life as made famous by a video game. Update: I’m still at zero visited. To be fair, wasn’t my biggest dream. For as much as I love the RCT games, I still don’t have a particular affinity for amusement parks. But both of the original two games are equally fun, albeit the second go around is far less memorable.

## TimeSplitters 2

I believe the first time I played TimeSplitters 2, it must have been at my friend’s house, because I have no idea otherwise how else this game would’ve entered my radar. He was a bit more unscrupulous of a gamer, or perhaps in cases like this it proved I was sometimes too fickle and narrow-minded of one. Even though we had no idea there was even a TimeSplitters 1, TS2 proved to be a worthwhile investment. As big Perfect Dark fans, we were surprised to find a lot of similarities here, with it going as far to include some multiplayer maps from PD disguised under a new name and visuals. There’s a big reason for that. I didn’t fully grasp the concept at the time, but this might be the first instance of me finding out that video game companies are not an amorphous entity, and are instead made up of individuals that sometimes move on to form new companies with their past colleagues.

TS2 was not quite as ambitious as PD in many regards, such as the weapon selection, and the campaign and cast of characters were not as memorable, but it brought over a lot of what made it great: weird guns, secondary fire modes and an expansive range of multiplayer options that include numerous characters, maps and bots. One big addition over PD is the map editor, and even though I didn’t understand what makes a good FPS map, that didn’t stop me from making plenty of bad ones!

## Metroid Prime

Metroid Prime probably comes as no surprise on this list, but it is still somewhat of a divisive game in the franchise. While I’m by no means a 2D Metroid speedrunner or sequence-breaker, there is something undeniably snappy about the 2D game mechanics. Many great 2D games hide a layer of complexity underneath their approachable surface. In contrast, I find MP trades in a lot of mechanics in exchange for a greater sense of atmosphere. There’s just something mesmerizing about gazing around the wonderful scenery, enhanced by a lot of cool visor effects, that is only possible with this being a 3D game. Somehow they managed to land on a mood that fits somewhere between lonely and relaxing, and that’s the true beauty of the game.

Gameplay wise, much of the expected Metroid tropes do make the jump to 3D: morph balls, missiles, locked doors everywhere, and so forth. Though it controls unconventionally for an FPS, and has a lot of platforming in a genre that’s not the best suited for it, it’s an admirable effort. Still to this day we don’t see a lot of 3D attempts at an interconnected Metroid-style world, and even though it cheats a bit by making them into more discrete zones, it’s a ton of fun exploring all the ways around. It is a bit heavy on backtracking, but luckily that’s aided by the incredible atmosphere. Someday I dream that we can see this genre reach its full potential in a proper modern, fully continuous world.

## Grand Theft Auto: Vice City

It’s hard to believe this sequel to GTA3 came out only a year later. Though not much different fundamentally, it brought in a brand new map, bolder casting (led by Ray Liotta), motorcycles, enterable buildings, and a far more familiar soundtrack. At the time, it wasn’t common to have this kind of celebrity casting in a video game. The portrayal of a specific period in recent past times was also something I don’t really recall much in games at the time. And while neon-soaked nostalgia is cliché these days, I recall it being a pretty early example of media taking us back to the 80s.

Unfortunately, I struggle a bit to come up with much more to say on this one. I have to admit that I’m not the biggest GTA fan, but I spent lots of time messing around in 3 and Vice City. San Andreas was also a big release at the time that I experienced mostly vicariously, but that is when I began to fall off from GTA. So this will be the last GTA entry here, and while these may not be generally considered the top two games in the series by most, they certainly captured the most amount of my time.

## The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker

Ocarina of Time already got a follow-up, but it wasn't until the GameCube that we would get a glimpse of a new generation of 3D Zelda. Count me in the camp that was hoping to see a more traditional and "realistic" style, only to be massively disappointed when the cartoon cel-shaded style was revealed. Looking back, was I really that disappointed, or just coping because I couldn't convince my parents to get me a GameCube? Or was I being a typical preteen boy and afraid to like something less "mature" than expected? 

The answer is probably all of the above, but in any case, it may have worked out that I didn't get to play it until later (I think possibly not even until after Twilight Princess). Removed from the original expectations of the time, with fresher and more mature eyes, I saw it for the great game it is. Though far from my favorite, it checked most of the expected boxes of that era of Zelda. The cel-shaded look makes Toon Link perhaps the most expressive version of the character. It was nice to see Zelda (the character) starting to get more involved in the story.

There are some quirky aspects to the gameplay, like the amount of dungeons, and the way you progress. The Great Sea is certainly a neat idea, and though going around to all the islands was fun, I've always thought the map would've been better off a little smaller. Exploring a contiguous landmass tends to be more fun in the end, but the sea exploration and the plot concept of a flooded Hyrule were nice for a one-off. 

Somewhere as a mid-ranking 3D Zelda, it didn't give me the same emotional hold as the ones before it, but it is a charming one that introduces lots of new concepts. And with a remaster that smooths over many of the flaws, while showing that the graphics aged better than a more realistic alternative, it's definitely still worthwhile. 

### Honorable Mentions

Metroid Fusion

Super Mario Sunshine