# Best Games of 2004

## Metroid Zero Mission

Here we go again, yet another Metroid (type) game! Zero Mission is a complete reworking of the original game, and it's fantastic. Though it's certainly far from a purist's take on the NES classic, a lot of necessary fat was trimmed to make this game playable. It's kind of funny to think that the remake itself is now older than the game it was remaking was, but in spite of that, I last played it just a couple years ago and it still holds up well.

The overall core of the original game is intact, with some generally welcome changes. A few of the more confusing and repetitive areas are trimmed down, with a few sections changed to add new challenges. The shooting and platforming are pretty similar at a basic level, but with a few changes that make it feel more like Super Metroid. Of course the in-game map is a key new feature. And though I don't feel all that strongly about it, the brand new epilogue was a significant addition.

Generally speaking I'd recommend ZM, but clearly I still hold some regard for the original, as it made this list too. The original is mostly interesting as a historical glimpse, and if you are actually interested in progressing without much headache then you should play ZM. But luckily enough, the original version is an unlockable to ZM, so it's part of the same package!

## Ninja Gaiden

Before it became cool in the 2010s, Ninja Gaiden was perhaps the original example of a franchise reboot, complete with the cliche stripped-down title. I'm not sure I was even aware of the original NG when I played this, at least until finding it as an in-game bonus that was way too hard for me. This game is also pretty hard too, so it's perhaps a good thing I wasn't aware of NG else I be turned off of the idea ahead of time. I was not and am still not a big player of the hack-and-slash genre, but this was one of the bigger Xbox exclusive must-haves outside of Halo.

Since I don't know much about hack-and-slash, I assume this is a pretty prototypical one: difficult, yet over-the-top stylized combos, with a bit of 3D exploration thrown in. Looking back, they are kind of comically geared towards teen boys and young men, with all the flashy gore, and in this case, some of Team Ninja's "trademarks" with characters like Rachel. But crazy male fantasy or not, ninjas are cool, especially Ryu Hayabusa, who takes it to absurd levels. You can run across water in this game and run up certain lengths of wall sideways, defying gravity. But the gameplay is far from stupid, requiring a lot of dedication to your button-mashing, so that you can remember the _right_ way to button mash to produce that satisfying combo.

## Half-Life 2

I was late to playing Half-Life 2, so I have only gone through it once, and though hard to remember specific details, it was a memorable experience overall. The two big things that set HL2 apart to me were the continuous mission structure and the physics-oriented gameplay. While most FPS have you hopping around from mission to mission, in HL2 you are always wandering from one place to the next, and although the game does give clear points of delineation between missions, there's something about that feeling of continuing to push on that enhances the game. There's a constant sense of this anxiety that Gordon Freeman is not escaping his situation any time soon (even if, in a similar game, it would only be for momentary debriefing), and it gives the world a much larger feel.

Valve games are known for experimenting a lot with physics, and in HL2 this is done most through the legendary gravity gun. The concept is so simple in hindsight, and has been adopted in various other games: pick up an object from a distance, and fling it away from you with force. It's such a natural fit for an FPS, giving you the ability to fling saw blades or launch explosive barrels at your foes. I still ended up using the regular guns more, but it was always fun to play around with.

I think the biggest weakness of HL2 was that I often got confused trying to find the next objective, but in a way I also appreciate that aspect, mostly because it feels like a product of a bygone era. The franchise as a whole sadly proved to be a dinosaur, not because it's outdated per se, but because of years without a conclusion. Eventually we got an unexpected VR revival that is unfortunately too cost-prohibitive for the average person, and I'll probably never play either, but maybe now there's a faint hope we get some kind of traditionally-controlled follow-up?

## Halo 2

While working on this list I had an epiphany after realizing The Simpsons Hit and Run released in 2003: since I'm pretty sure that H&R was part of the Christmas package where we got our original Xbox, it must have been 2003 that we got it, instead of 2002 as I had previously thought. By today's standards, the three-year gap between Halo 1 and 2 is nothing, so it's especially funny to me to realize that I had been playing Halo for less than a year, yet Halo 2 felt like the ultimate Game That Can Not Come Out Soon Enough.

My Halo 2 story is one of a bygone era. Even though it considerably predates the digital distribution age, Halo 2 feels like perhaps the last true huge gaming release event. I remember seeing multi-page features in the newspaper surrounding the hype for the game. They talked about all the celebrity voice cameos. Coverage of people waiting in lines was all over mainstream news channels, the stuff usually reserved for _console_ launches. It felt like were in a new era, a widespread celebration of gaming, and industry legitimacy.

Halo 2 was really a lot of the same, but that isn't such a bad thing with a great formula to base it on, and I definitely took notice of the additions at the time. I'm not sure if the campaign was _better_ than CE or not, but it was so mind-blowing at the time to have them take it to Earth. The duel-wielding felt like a modern take on a classic FPS element. Most of all, there were just numerous new weapons, gameplay changes and maps that ensured this was a multiplayer staple for a long time. It pretty much replaced the original for me in that regard, feeling much better to play.

Of course, the real biggest addition was Xbox Live play, but I didn't get to experience much of it. True to this being a dated story, I lacked both the broadband internet (like many households of the time) or ability to pay a subscription fee. But most good things have to start somewhere, often ahead of their time, and even if Halo 2 wasn't a big innovator in the console online space, it certainly ushered it into a new era.

### Honorable Mentions

Mega Man X8

Metroid Prime 2