# Best Games of 2005

## Resident Evil 4

Since this was the first Resident Evil game I played, I had no preconceived notion of how they “should” be. Years later, I still have yet to touch many of the RE games, but I do know this: while RE4 might not be the scariest, and it isn’t the most action-oriented, or the campiest, it might be the most perfect marriage of all these things. When I first touched this game, I hadn’t really seen anything like it before, and yet it felt so great to play. 

Though the new third-person shooter mechanics were divisive, RE4 is still dripping with creepy atmosphere, twisted freaks of nature and heart-raising close calls with killer chainsaws. Whether properly “scary” or not, it certainly isn’t for the faint of heart. Yet the game knows when to disarm the tension with trademark RE cheese. Complementing the amped-up action of the gameplay, Leon is dialed up to absurd levels, an unflinching hero who somersaults out of glass windows with ease and whose most cherished weapon is an awful one-liner. Everyone I know who has played this remembers tons of lines, but only by playing them in the context of the game can you truly understand why they’re so funny. It is a different kind of funny than the infamous acting of the first RE game, feeling much more deliberate, but restrained enough not to spoil every serious moment. 

Regardless, the gameplay itself is of course what really shines here. While ammo is not as stingy as its predecessors, it is still scarce compared to most shooters. To compensate for this, there is fortunately a great system to use melee command attacks—suplexing never gets old—and you always have your trusty knife.  Speaking of the knife, RE4 is notable for being the first game I recall widely being able to find gameplay videos on YouTube, both having been released around the same time. I loved those knife run videos, showing the limits of what’s possible. But I stick to the guns, because they’re so fun to shoot and upgrade, plus with the new merchant mechanic, it gives way to a nice degree of exploration for treasures. 

I’ve replayed RE4 a lot over the years, whether it’s with the very fun and overpowered bonus guns or starting over completely. I would say that it still holds up, but having now been remade, I have to think harder on that one. Ironically, one of the more dated aspects, in which you stand still while shooting and move the reticle around the screen, is in my opinion a fun change of pace compared to the centered reticle standard of shooters today. While I’d probably recommend a brand new player to skip straight to the remake, I ranked the original on the list instead since it laid the foundation, and I still appreciate many of its quirks that didn’t make the jump.