# Best Games of 2006

## The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess

Twilight Princess might remain one of the most hyped moments ever from E3: after the cartoonish Wind Waker, they delivered a trailer that showed a far grittier, more realistic take. I was intrigued, but sometimes my mind proves to be fickle, or games just disappoint. It wasn't a bad game obviously, but I couldn't help but think it was an overcorrection, with the twilight theme trying to exude some kind of dark themes that didn't quite land. It was one of those things in the game that felt tacked on. Others just feel out of place, like Wolf Link.

It says a lot about the quality of Zelda games that a disappointment can make my top 100, but TP is at its best when it's playing safe, leaning heavily on what makes its predecessors great. Each time I've replayed it, tuning out the more annoying/tedious parts since I know what to expect, it feels a bit more like a soft reboot of Ocarina of Time - though yes, an argument can also be made that OoT lifted a lot from A Link to the Past. Some of it is more superficial, like the theme/ordering of forest-fire-water dungeons, but I can't help but feel things like the choice for a more adult Link were a deliberate callback. Horse riding returns, with expanded combat options, but there are sequences of the game where they're clearly trying too hard to showcase it.

TP does have a lot of cool dungeons, at least thematically, even if they started to take a more linear approach. It also stands out from OoT and others with a lot of unique items. I was disappointed that many of them didn't have a wider use, but can't deny they were fun and differentiate the game a bit more. There were certainly some epic story moments, even if a few left me scratching my head. There's just something I've always found "off" about this game in a way that's hard to describe, but it's a great game in the grand scheme of things, and has got all the ingredients of a classic 3D Zelda, however oddly they came together.

## Wii Sports

This might be my entry that makes this feels most like an IGN-style list that it wasn’t supposed to be. Wii Sports was a pretty shallow experience, and a legacy that never really carried through even with there being a surprising Switch sequel. But it was a game that everyone had, coming packed with the hugely popular Wii. I can’t recall if the late model (sadly sans GameCube) from when I eventually got my own Wii included it, but I played it at so many other people’s houses and dorm rooms anyway. 

Even when this was still a thing people played, it was about half of a great game, with baseball and bowling dominating in popularity. I swear the baseball results were so arbitrary that it had to be mostly RNG, yet it was addictive with the way I would constantly convince myself, no _this_ time I’ll figure out the magic swing to hit a homer every time. 