# Best Games of 2007

## Portal

Proof that good things sometimes do come in small packages, Portal crams a ton of interesting puzzles and quirky dialogues into its 2-3 hour runtime. Armed with only a gun that creates portals as you try to escape a coldly sterile lab, it's a surprisingly simple yet complex idea for a game. The concept of teleporting around wasn't new, but it was a technical marvel in the way that it was done so seamlessly with the world, nearly anywhere you could want. Physics play a large role, such as how you carry your momentum through portals, and there were puzzles that required me think much harder than "I'm at point A and need to shoot the portal at point B".

In an era where big budget publishers are obsessed with pushing the scope and length of games, Portal still remains a welcome change of pace. It may not be long, but that makes it conveniently replayable, and there are pretty much no dull moments or filler outside of the expected loading zones.

## Super Mario Galaxy

How do you take one of the most successful and acclaimed franchises to the next level? How about going to space? SMG was the most audacious Mario yet, throwing out some of the structure from 64 and Sunshine for a new take. Instead of the more open levels of before, they are now more focused on a particular objective at a time, though not as linear as 3D Land/World would be. You end up with smaller levels, but much more of them, as the game is always pushing the next concept, and they're almost always amazing. There's the round planets that have a neat gravity effect. Some pseudo-2D sections make an appearance. Transformation suits are back! From top-to-bottom, it's an incredible collection of highly polished and varied 3D platforming. 

### Honorable Mentions

Halo 3 (_Review in 2024 Year in Review_)

Metroid Prime 3

Guitar Hero 3
