# Best Games of 2008

## Dead Space

I am a long time fan of Resident Evil 4, but I didn't play Dead Space for the first time until much more recently. It's not totally fair to compare the two, but inevitable for me, given the clear RE4 influence in how you move and shoot, plus the weapon upgrade system. That is about where the similarities end, but it's a strong foundation for a game I was bound to enjoy playing. 

Surprisingly, I found the sci-fi themed DS to be the much scarier game of the two, as RE4 is more traditional horror, though yes, _campy_ horror. The enemies in DS are disturbing, the gore content astronomical, and Isaac's psychological torture palpable. Instead of snarking the cartoon villains, you are hunting down visions of your probably dead girlfriend while trying to make sense of the alien takeover of the vessel. A tradeoff in achieving the level of tension is that you don't feel as powerful from a gameplay standpoint. The melee and the guns were not nearly as fun or snappy as RE4, but it does give you pretty good chances to stay alive. I was also a bit letdown by the lack of variety in locations, but it was nonetheless a gripping game.

## Super Smash Bros. Brawl

Super Smash Bros. Brawl came out the same year that I began college, so you can bet that every single Wii owner at school had this. I didn't have my own Wii yet, but nonetheless got ample chances to play this. What more can really be said about Smash? It's Smash! At this point, the downside to the franchise was that the sheer number of characters got daunting. I gave up on trying to master more than a few, if I even mastered _any_ of them. The important thing is, even if you aren't good at the game, it's really fun to play over and over with a group.

## Mario Kart Wii

Just like Smash Bros., Mario Kart is a popular staple of multiplayer sessions for my generation. The big gimmick with the Wii version of course was the wheel, which you didn't need at all, but did provide a bit more natural of a grip as you tilted the controller around like an idiot. I always found this MK to be difficult to master with the control, but it was so ubiquitous it's hard to leave off the list.

## Mega Man 9

It may be considered pretty cliche now, but retro-styled graphics were once a bold move, especially from a company as significant as Capcom. Of course, it helped that they had a history of actual NES games to draw from, but it still impressed me the way they were able to create such an authentic experience. Everything from the graphics to the sound and the nuances of the physics is an uncanny replication of the NES. As I recall they even purposely included the slowdown that happens with too many sprites on screen.

Mega Man 9 is really more like an alternate-universe MM3. Leaning on the popularity of MM2, the slide and charge shot are gone, and even some sounds are lifted straight from it. It's the core essence of what makes classic MM great, but done of course with 8 fresh new Robot Master stages and a killer Wily fortress. It does have a few overly difficult parts and not as many checkpoints as I'd like, but none of the MM games are perfect in this regard. What makes it perhaps my favorite is that there are virtually no duds in the soundtrack, plus the unique special weapons see many more use cases than previous MM games. While I wouldn't go as far to say it made 8-bits cool again - that felt a bit like an inevitable zeitgeist - it is one of the earlier retro revivals I can think of.

## Geometry Wars: Retro Evolved 2

Speaking of retro revivals, the Geometry Wars series reaches back even further, vaguely recalling the visuals of Asteroids. Its origin might be one of the greatest gaming Easter eggs ever, a game-within-a-game that I originally found playing Project Gotham Racing 2. The lazy name and concept even reflect that it's a throw-in to something else. Fundamentally it's a space shooter where you shoot at shapes, and that's about it. Are they sentient floating shapes, or just aliens who were big fans of geometry? Who knows, but the important thing is there are many of them and they want you dead.

There's not much else you can say about a simple game, but the execution is terrific. The twin-stick controls are super smooth and intuitive. There are a few different modes, all of which are build around the concepts of evading and/or shooting ships as you go around, but with enough twists to keep it fun. I'm not a huge fan of classic arcade games, but Geometry Wars is one of those insanely addictive "one more try" games that proves the concept of going for a simple high score still holds water.