# Best Games of 2009

## New Super Mario Bros. Wii

I was surprised when going through the list of 2009 games that a year smack dab in the middle of the Wii/360/PS3 generation could be so underwhelming, at least in my eyes. I didn't even play most of the games here until recently, and I think my ultimate choice would be an honorable mention in most other years. I had a difficult time deciding which of these to pick, but in the end, I went with the one that I actually played around the time - even nostalgia hits with adulthood games!

After SMB3 and SMW, it was difficult to see how the 2D Mario series could innovate, and perhaps that's why we didn't see a major release for many years. Unfortunately the NSMB series never did quite scratch the classic Mario itch for me, but the Wii version was a big deal, bringing 2D Mario back to consoles. NSMB games are very polished and full of great platforming concepts, but I've always found them to be a bit sterile, perhaps too by-the-book in contrast to the 80's and 90's games that could still get away with being more experimental.

NSMBW may have helped revitalize simultaneous co-op in 2D games, and it's both the game's best and worst feature. It was much better suited to co-op than older consoles since things like camera zooms are much easier, but you will still end up with difficulties pacing players together. The game also allows collisions, so bumping each other off ledges is inevitable. It's a horrible way to try to play the game _well_, but the chaos is also a big part of what made it so fun. Played solo, I would rather stick with one of the classics, but the co-op is an undeniable improvement for screwing around with friends.

### Honorable Mentions

Demon's Souls

Uncharted 2