# Best Games of 2010

## Super Mario Galaxy 2

Super Mario Galaxy 2 is one of the best games ever, and yet I don't have all that much to say about it. The level design approach is much like the first SMG, and in my memory, it's possible if I were to try recalling specific moments I'd mix up the two games. The biggest addition obviously is Yoshi, and there was some streamlining of the world map. Other than that, it's a lot like its predecessor. It's rare for Nintendo to create a sequel that builds on the same engine and gameplay, but it's usually not a bad idea, as several games on this list were a result of it.

## Rock Band 3

Guitar Hero walked so Rock Band could run. I imagine this series must have arisen from someone doing unofficial karaoke while playing GH, and then being like well let’s also throw in some plastic drums. It’s such a simple and obvious iteration, and yet it made GH pretty much obsolete until they decided to go the full band route to keep up.

I don’t really know which RB is the best, but I think I played 3 most? Or it might have been 2. But I also want to say you could import songs from 2 to 3, essentially making it a completely expanded version of 2. The keyboard was also a fun addition, and while I don’t remember ever knowing someone who played the new pro mode, this was at least back when rhythm games had the good sense to keep their changed control schemes optional. 

RB3 might have been released slightly on the downturn of the genre’s peak, but before consumer fatigue fully set in. Now these have sadly become dinosaurs, but they were once so ubiquitous that their appeal likely needs no explanation. Most people, including me, have no musical talent, but these games let you approximate the feeling of hitting the right notes without actually needing to know anything about music, and pair well with alcohol. It may be dead now but ask just about anyone who was a teen or young adult at the time and they undoubtedly have great memories of these games.

## Donkey Kong Country Returns

I remember when this was announced, Donkey Kong had somewhat disappeared from the zeitgeist outside of his party game appearances, but I was among the fans excited for the revival of a 14 year old series. They were even doing it with Donkey Kong and Diddy Kong, just the way it all started. It turned out not to be the game I was really expecting, but I'm not sure why that bothered me at the time. 

Ironically for a series that first caught my attention with its innovative graphics, with the revivals I felt there was a bit too much emphasis on spectacle. It's full of wide-panning shots, foreground and background shifting and silhouette levels. For some reason this was jarring to me, but it's an understandable take on modernizing it. The level design is still great, and there are secrets to be found, but something about it seemed a little more linear and hurried. 

The bonus rooms are a bit disappointing, harkening back more to the simple arcade-style item grabs from the first game, rather than the level-appropriate challenges of 2 and 3. Now collectibles are spread out through the level, in secret areas or not. I've come to appreciate it more as that is just the new standard for linear platformers. And these are pretty minor gripes, but it does change the way progression towards bonus stages works compared to past games. But eventually, you gotta move on from the past, right? I might still place the 80s and 90s as a golden age for platformers, but modern times have provided some fresh takes that retain much of what made them great.

### Honorable Mentions

VVVVVV

Mega Man 10