# Best Games of 2011

## Minecraft

I must have first seen Minecraft in 2009 or 2010, back when it was a web-based beta (or even alpha). I'd see people checking it out on school computers and being just absolutely fascinated, having never seen anything like it before. I realize the irony in that now, as it was pretty much stolen from an existing game, but Mojang did figure out how to make its niche inspirations into something for a wider audience. As time went on, I didn't know a ton about the game, but heard of things like people making functioning circuits, and my intrigue only grew as it approached official release.

Minecraft might be the first game I was so interested in that I had to stop myself _before_ I even played it. You see, I was in the midst of my senior year of college, and with the finish line so close, the prospect of getting caught up in long gaming sessions was too dangerous. And Minecraft is indeed a big time sink, but there was still something worth it to me. There are so many different ways to play the game now, both officially and via unofficial mods, but for me it was always about getting on a server with friends and building up our bases. It could be both synchronous and asynchronous, and you get to see each other build things up over time.

That was the basic process for me, but each map changes your inspirations and comes out differently. We'd typically do that until we got bored, then wait a few months or years, and start all over again on a new map. Aside of course from the procedural generation, the various free updates over the years help to mix it up. I've held on to the data files for most of the maps I've played on, and they will be a treasured way to take a trip down memory lane... sort of like writing this list has been.

## Dark Souls

Arguably the most influential game series of the decade, somehow I never really heard all that much about Souls games for a long time. Even when I finally did play this, I'm not entirely sure I "got" it. On the surface it seems like a pretty simplistic third-person action RPG, yet it's hard to think of notable predecessors that were similar. Fundamentally it's just about fighting things and trying to stay alive, and has a lot of your RPG staples: various melee combat options, bows and magic spells. Where it gets a little more novel is with the stamina system, dodging and parrying. The other big deal is the progression system, with your souls that go towards leveling being lost upon death.

When Souls games are described this way, they don't sound all that compelling, and sometimes I'm still not sure they _are_, but I would not intentionally sell them short. The difficulty is of course important, but beyond cliche to mention. But I don't even think it's that they're fun because they are difficult, but rather what said difficulty represents, which is why it landed on the list.

Dark Souls and company are games seemingly made to please no one in particular, and yet that's why they have gained an audience. In an increasingly large industry where big budget developers constantly chase established trends, looking for a safe bet, From Software is simply making a humble _game_. They eschew flashy cutscenes, celebrity stunt casts, endless collectables, and so on; the things that don't always make a game _bad_, but rarely make one _good_. If they are going to alienate a player, it will be because of a game mechanic. And sometimes the game mechanics aren't great, maybe even border on unfair, but it's an admirable move. It's understated in today's industry, yet in a way is far bolder than the race for the biggest Hollywood spectacle or largest map to dump content in.

I'm still a bit overcome with the idea these games aren't really for me. I tend to play things just to see the story one time (or in the case of a Souls game, more so the incredible world design), but these are designed to be played multiple times. There are of course different builds you can try but there's also a learning curve to timing your moves and managing stamina. It's mechanically pretty rich for the dedicated, or something you can just grind through a bit like me. It's hard to say if this is the best one (as I need to play many of the others), but as the first one I played it'll always stick out in my mind.

## Portal 2

Portal 2 is pretty much everything that made the first game great, but bigger. Just not too big... it's still a compact 10ish hours, but better to never overstay your welcome. The thing I actually remember most about Portal 2 is the world design, where you gradually ascend up layers of Aperture's history. It's super cool, as each one has a distinctive design, and is the kind of concept that could only work right in a video game. Of course there are plenty of new puzzles and mechanics, but the impact of seeing the portal gun (not to mention a rogue AI) is certainly diminished quite a bit the second time around. Nonetheless, it still has a ton of novelty and charm. If I had to rank the games on this list against each other, I'm not sure it would land super high sentimentally as a _favorite_, but the Portal games are so unique as to be among the most _essential_.

## The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword

Ah, the old standby makes it on the list once again, yet might be the weakest of this year, amongst these more novel new(ish)comers. Skyward Sword is a game I once loved considerably, but realize now maybe it was just one I badly _wanted_ to love. In a post-Breath of the Wild world, it has unquestionably looked weaker with time, but before then it was the most ambitious at trying to bring new things to a stagnating series.

A lot of the new features unfortunately don't land. There are a few new challenges around the stamina, but it feels pretty half baked. I didn't have a ton of trouble with the sword controls, but it would be naive to act like they were problem free. I still think they were a net positive, bringing some much-needed change to combat that had gotten too button mashy, but clearly best left as a one-off. More minor Wiimote features like aiming were nice when they worked right, but not a game-changer. Crafting was inoffensive but a bit of a waste of time.

Sadly, many things didn't change, and if anything some of the weaker elements of this era of 3D Zelda were doubled down on, like overzealous helpers, rigidly limited exploration and questionable filler quests. I actually didn't mind the concept of navigating the surface only through sky points too much in theory, but both sky and surface world felt a bit underdeveloped to truly pull this off.

I do still like a lot about SS, like the concept of Link being a school student, and much of the world-building as an origin story, aside from some cop-outs on introducing a new villain. The dungeons are still largely great, and the sky was an all-new setting. An occasional brilliant mechanic like the time stones shows up. Even as SS falls in my rankings with time, I can't help but feel it remains a misunderstood, and possibly underrated entry.

### Honorable Mentions

Rayman Origins

Super Mario 3D Land

Dead Space 2 (_Review in 2024 Year in Review_)
