# Best Games of 2012

## Halo 4

I understand that putting Halo 4 on this over 3 seems strange, but there are two main reasons: first, it just wasn't the strongest year. Secondly, I simply was able to play 4 a lot more, as I wasn't able to obtain an Xbox 360 for a while, but when Halo 4 came out I had access to one and then a year later was able to get my own when the Xbox One launched.

When Halo 4 came out, I wasn't super in tune with the whole Bungie-343 situation, but was still aware of the consternation surrounding a new developer releasing their first totally new Halo game. There is little doubt that at this point we were past Halo's prime as one of the biggest names in gaming, but I like to think of Halo 4 as its last gasp of relevance. The hype levels didn't match 2 or 3, but I do recall it was somewhat of an event when it launched. 

At this point it seemed like nobody really cared about playing the campaign, and after breezing through it once I can say yeah, it was quite forgettable. Even with the Halo games that had better campaigns, it really was all about the multiplayer for me. Halo 4 made some Call of Duty-esque attempts at customizing loadouts with different weapons and perks that weren't my favorite changes, but with various game modes that got added back in over time it improved. Some weird design decisions/mismanagement aside, Halo still has really good core mechanics that are fun to play so long as people will actually play it, and in the case of 4 I remember years after launch still having a healthy player base to keep me going.

### Honorable Mentions

New Super Mario Bros. U

Fez