# Best Games of 2013

## Rayman Legends

Rayman is one of those characters that everyone who plays games sort of knows about from the periphery, but is easy to look at and think "oh, another knockoff mascot platformer". And in truth, even after playing Rayman Origins and then Legends, I can't say the characters of Rayman exude the kind of iconic power of Mario, Sonic or Donkey Kong. But in terms of level design and gameplay, he's right up there with those legends, at least in this appropriately-named entry.

RL plays closest to the modern DKC games, and while it's common for me to make comparisons between games unfavorably, I think both are strengthened by the connection. Playing RL felt familiar (in a good way) because of this, and yet at the same time helped me appreciate the design of the newer DKC games more, being able to separate them from preconceived notions of how they _should_ be. 

RL has all the staples of a modern 2D platformer: lots of collectibles, a few secret areas and an emphasis on stringing together short but high difficulty challenges in mostly linear levels. Each level of course tends to have some major gimmick, be it visual or gameplay or both. A big highlight of the game is obviously the music levels, which have a bit of rhythmic timing to them. I also recall a level where the camera had a neat effect like you were looking through an aquarium, but there are so many more. It's one of those pull out all the creative stops games you would not expect to come from a developer like Ubisoft.

## Rocksmith 2014

Rocksmith feels like a bit of a weird pick to me, as it’s less of a game and more of a gamified interactive teaching tool. At a surface level, it comes off as being Guitar Hero with a real guitar, but the emphasis is much more on building accuracy and technique, with scaling custom difficulty and a lack of miss penalties. I had to put RS on the list since it actually got me into learning guitar, and there’s something to be said for that. It’s a bit of a non-traditional path, as most people start on acoustic, and naturally this is more attuned to electric guitar songs since it scores based on the pitch directly from your pickups.

Like all music games, one unfortunate aspect is that you are the liberty of licensing, at least without modding your game, and even then you still need someone to be willing to chart it. It hurts a bit more in this one too since you actually want to learn the songs instead of being more about the party aspect. Speaking of which, this game does actually allow two players, and there are a number of mini-game modes, though for me, the focus was more on simply playing through songs to hone my skills and use the virtual tones.

### Honorable Mentions

The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds (_Review in 2024 Year in Review_)

Super Mario 3D World (_Review in 2024 Year in Review_)
