# Best Games of 2014

## Mario Kart 8

I've had a couple Mario Karts on the list already, but 8 is the first one I've played that truly feels like a great game outside of the party game factor. I'm not even sure I knew about drifting in MK until I played this one, because it's either much more complicated or just not highly emphasized in others. But in 8 it's in this perfect sweet spot of being easy enough to execute while providing a good skill curve. You of course will still get some of the typical MK item/rubber-banding nonsense, but the mechanics are so finely tuned it's easy to put up with. And with a huge course selection and roster that even includes games outside the Mario family (Link is here!), it really is the ultimate MK game. Plus you can race in antigravity! 

## Donkey Kong Country: Tropical Freeze

_Additional review in 2024 Year in Review_

There's not a whole lot to say about Donkey Kong Country: Tropical Freeze that wasn't already said in my Donkey Kong Country Returns review. On the surface, there isn't much that's different aside from being in HD, plus the addition of some familiar faces back into the mix. There was no radical shift in some of the things that disappointed me about DKCR. But I've grown to appreciate them both more with time, particularly after playing Rayman Legends, as mentioned in that review.

DKCTF is certainly not just a retread of DKCR, as it expands upon those concepts bit by bit. It's hard to explain, but it's like the approach was to make each level about 15% bigger and more creative than they did before. It feels similar, yet adds up over time. Sometimes I'd feel a bit overwhelmed with the size of some levels, but they are broken out into many chunks, in contrast with the SNES games having a single checkpoint consistently. It took me a while to understand this is how the modern approach to platformers is often gonna be, but one thing that I was never in doubt about was the creativity in this game. Every level has its own thing going on, and they together tell a little story for the world, which is really what makes the game worth visiting in such a crowded genre.

## Shovel Knight

Yet another 2D platformer, and also a game that didn't immediately click for me. I recall a videogamedunkey video where he said that Shovel Knight is sort of like a great buffet in contrast to a fancy restaurant, and that helped me contextualize the guilt of indulging in what others do well that is SK. Maybe an analogy of a solid cover album also suits it: it's built heavily on the shoulders of others, but a good game is a good game.

Still, I can't help but bring up the comparisons, as they ran all throughout my mind when I played it. Mostly the game is Mega Man, down to the feel of the movement, the eight bosses, and even the two main characters having a blue/red motif like Mega Man and Proto Man. The world map is Super Mario Bros. 3. The combat and subweapons are like some mix of Zelda II, Ducktales and Castlevania. The towns are Zelda II, again. The death system takes some inspiration from Dark Souls... wait, that's not a classic NES game!

The framework for SK may have come from a lot of inspirations, but that framework alone certainly doesn't make for a great game. And there is hardly a single flaw with the details Yacht Club filled in to make this whole. It's full of tight, fair level design that iterates over time. The visual variety is nice, with lots of memorable locales and enemies, and the dialogue and characterization throughout the game are fun. Shovel Knight is a suitably simple but effective design. You might feel like you're revisiting classics of old when playing this, but was that ever such a bad thing? And it even includes three bonus campaigns, which were generously offered for free for a very long time.

## Geometry Wars 3: Dimensions

I couldn't decide which Geometry Wars to put between 2 and 3, so why not both? I already talked about the history of GW in my review for GW2. That one was a nice simple arcade-esque throwback, but GW3 is more of a full-fledged game. Make no mistake, the arcade fundamentals are still there, but in this one you have a pretty sizable campaign to go through with many different levels. The big twist that allowed them to have so many variations is taking the game 3D, but not in the way one might think. It's really still a 2D twin-stick shooter, but the "plane" of the playfield is now wrapped around 3D objects, which adds an extra layer of challenge. There's not much else to it... no big story or epic moments, but a game that is just _fun_.
