# Best Games of 2015

## Rocket League

I'll never endorse the idea of hours played as a metric of a game's quality, but if it was, then Rocket League might be at or very near the top of my list. It's your classic multiplayer game where one match lasts just a few minutes but infinite replayability (and, to be fair, _lots_ of cumulative queue/idle time) pushes it into hundreds of hours. And even for as much as I played, I'm so far away from the top ranks, but that's okay as the matchmaking is generally quite good at giving you a fair game.

RL is one of those games that's such a simple concept that you wonder why it wasn't done before: you play soccer driving around in cars that can sometimes fly with rocket boosts. As you learn the game it becomes much more evident how much nuance goes into it. It's not just the concept, but the physics require a lot of delicate balancing, and Psyonix achieved something that truly feels great. I didn't start on this game until it had already been out a few years, but I don't recall seeing a single patch that changed the physics, a testament to how much they got it right. Of course, I know that it actually _was_ attempted before, at the very least in Psyonix's own Supersonic Acrobatic Rocket-Powered Battle-Cars. I never played this predecessor, but they no doubt learned a lot from the first draft, especially in marketable naming.

About the only complaints I have with RL are bigger industry problems: the game has taken on various forms of predatory microtransactions, and they love to make a lot of fun alternate modes only temporary. At least the microtransactions are only cosmetic, and the permanent game modes are still fun after all these years.

## Super Mario Maker

The concept of a level editor has been around for a long time, but outside of things done by independent modders, it's usually tacked on to a game and often misused or underused. Few series would be able to get away with what Super Mario Maker did, making an entire game out of a level editor, but it has such an established history that players can easily understand it. The concept is simple, and it's not the only game that tiles well, but what makes it so uniquely great is the mechanics underpinning it.

There are some things that are not so great about it, namely the way you find levels. Uploading levels can also be a pain if they're difficult, as you must clear them yourself, but it is reasonable to prevent unwinnable levels - this does become annoying if you want to make any small tweaks later on. The vast majority of levels are also just plain bad, but there's definitely a case to be made that people should be able to upload whatever they want (especially considering how many are children). It can be difficult to find great ones with the in-game tools; I recall fans ended up making their own level search site.

But when you do find a great level, you will experience some of the best 2D platforming of all time. I can hardly even name all the cool things I've seen - pong, big mechs, a "Game Boy", recreations of levels from 3D Mario games, etc. - not very literally of course, being chained to 2D Mario mechanics, but when done right they work very well and with a little imagination you can see it. Even a lot of the simpler levels are cool because of the way mechanics from different Mario games are mashed up. They had to invent a lot of ways for these things to interact, but they're so smoothly integrated that there's a sort of childlike magic to it. I don't like to think about how they programmed a Buzzy Beetle shell to spin out of a Bullet Bill launcher, but rather that they just put it in there and it did its thing - which is ultimately how you see it as a player. I made some decent creations myself, but people have stretched the different combinations of mechanics so far it's mind-blowing, while at the same time feeling perfectly in place. 

## Ori and the Blind Forest

Lots of Metroidvanias are pretty strict adherents to the genre, with clear references to their inspirations, but a glance, an unsuspecting gamer may not realize what they're getting into with Ori. Instead of being confined to caverns and castles, Ori features a lot of sweeping naturalistic landscapes. Precise combat is minimized (something where I think the sequel faltered a bit) in favor of an emphasis on gameplay centered around acrobatic movement. It certainly doesn't reinvent the genre, but these elements help it stand out in the sea of derivatives. Of course there is also still that satisfying element of progressing through new abilities, but the main appeal is its lovely artistic approach.

### Honorable Mentions

Undertale