# Best Games of 2016

## Stardew Valley

In the back of my mind, since I never played any of the Harvest Moon games, I always wondered "How much does this shamelessly rip off from Harvest Moon?". I'm not sure why, as whether or not it did, this modern top-down farming simulator is clearly a labor of love. Its development history alone is fascinating to me, something of an aspirational and inspirational (but also harrowing) tale of a single developer's passion and willingness to take personal risks for his career. Stardew Valley fittingly begins by reflecting that dreamer inside of us, as your humble farmer escapes their dreary but presumably stable corporate job to start a new life.

Funnily enough, SV would go on to not only eclipse the vestiges of Harvest Moon, but inspire a slew of imitators and knock-offs of its own. While I haven't played these imitations, it's hard to imagine that they could come close to the depth SV offers. Not only is there a lot of variety to the gameplay to mix up each day (farming, fishing, mining, and all sorts of other exploration, not to mention socializing), but the characters have a surprising range. It's willing to portray darker elements of humanity, like depression, addiction, homelessness, family conflict and more. Of course, centered at the core of the game is the fight to rebuild the town's community center. You can improve it on your own terms through various tasks in the game, or throw money at Joja Mart - owned by the soulless corporation you worked for in the prologue - to fix the problems.

At its core, SV is still a pretty laid back game, but what I feel the imitators fail to realize (at least going off their marketing) is there is more to it. It's not a cash grab trying to take advantage of perceived trends; as a single person's passion you see elements of his ethos. SV does unabashedly embrace the silly, "video-gamey" aspects while also delivering commentary, packaged up in an imperfect but romantic little farming community.

### Honorable Mentions

Doom

Uncharted 4