# Best Games of 2017

## The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild

Here it is. The big dog. A recurring talking point in this list is my search for a Zelda game that could make me feel the way I did when I first played Ocarina of Time, and finally it delivered. BotW stood out by being very much _not_ like OoT or any of the Zeldas before it, but this was a series getting in desperate need of a reboot. Waiting to write this with Tears of the Kingdom just months out, I’m not sure how long it will last, but nearly since the day it dropped this has held my crown as the best game ever. The older I get, the rarer it is to find a game that leaves me truly awed, but when BotW came out I knew something was special, breezing through over 100 hours in a matter of a couple weeks (it helped that I was unemployed at the time).

Somehow BotW feels like it invented the modern open world game, even though the genre was well in vogue by the time. Most popular open world games are RPGs, which have their merits, but for my money, I love the effective simplicity deployed here. Rather than speccing towards one or two combat styles that shoehorn you to a few types of weapons, you have free reign to use whatever you can pick up. The much-maligned weapon breaking system gives you an incentive to blaze through numerous weapons and experiment, rather than just settling on the one with the highest damage. Even the armor system is more detailed than typical Zelda, even if it’s not the most complicated in the grand scheme, and who doesn’t love a good outfit change? The elemental weakness systems and the enemy variety aren’t as rich as comparable games, but the fun is in finding different ways to approach these interactions with its robust self-described “chemistry engine”. These interactions are always hiding in plain sight, with the game delivering a small number of intuitive axioms (i.e. fire burns things) and leaving the player to find out exciting ways to take advantage of them.

BotW also avoids the open world trap of becoming a “checklist game” full of sidequests where you just follow tracks or go hopping around point to point on the map talking to NPCs. It does have a few quests like this, but I gather that most people just ignored them, because the game is already like one big sidequest. While it may not have the best graphics, I’ve never played a game that comes close to having so many interesting vantages. Seriously, almost anywhere you can stand, there is a cool canyon or lush forest or an imposing mountain off in the distance. The mere act of wandering around the map is fun by itself. In addition to the nice scenery, the climbing and gliding made it so effortless to get anywhere. The Korok seeds that dot the map are a nice way to break it up with bite-sized puzzles that don’t turn into the aforementioned wild goose chases. It’s odd how for technically being a dystopia, I wish I could escape to this world in real life.

I could go on and on, and have already decided to throw the 500 word limit out just for this one. The shrines are a nice take on the dungeon; while not every one of them is a winner, you can go in knowing that you’ll have a good chance of doing a cool little physics puzzle, plus a tangibly useful reward at the end. You won’t find the most compelling characters or story here, but one advantage of having 30 years of lore to build on is that there’s an excitement to seeing new takes on familiar races and factions. Even the more minor NPCs, if nothing else, are executed with trademark Nintendo whimsy. 

This game is so good I haven’t even talked about the main quest, but it’s almost like a role reversal. While the “main” content is definitely worth playing as well, anything you choose feels like main content; it’s all fun. I don’t have a ton to say about the story, but I appreciate the more audacious elements that they brought to the table. I’m fully here for giant laser robots and Link riding a motorcycle. These are the kind of concepts that a game of this caliber can confidently execute, recalling Final Fantasy’s plunge into modernity. It might not have been the “traditional” Zelda some were expecting, but whatever it was trying to be, every piece was perfectly in place.

## Super Mario Odyssey

It's funny in hindsight to think that I once considered sticking with the Wii U for BotW (though again, unemployed), but Nintendo had another trick up their sleeve: A new 3D Mario game to tempt us with. Thankfully the Switch turned out to be a great purchase for a multitude of reasons, but these two releases alone could make the case that its launch year was also its best year. Even though Mario has never really been in a slump since its debut, Odyssey was so good it somehow felt like a much-needed return to form. Structurally it's primarily like Super Mario 64 or Sunshine, which is bound not to please everyone, but I thought that style was ripe for a modern take. And with a good mix of more isolated and linear challenges thrown in, you get tastes of what makes every style of 3D Mario great.

Of course not every level or moon is amazing, but "some levels are better than others" could be said for any game, and you'd be hard-pressed to find a game that has even half as many interesting micro-objectives as Odyssey is crammed with. The base platforming is predictably great, but the hat transformation gives an extra element of surprise and variety to each level that past games only reached more sporadically. Even among the weaker levels there are no true duds, and many levels are amazing. The highlight of the game for most will be New Donk City, which boldly introduces vocalized music to the game as well as a more realistic setting, unexpectedly (don't forget the pre-release Sonic 06 jokes) culminating in what could arguably be the best level in all of gaming.

And Odyssey just keeps adding extra cherries on top after that. It went above and beyond with extra postgame content, which is hard to elaborate on if only because the surprise is part of what makes it so great. Oh, and (for the first time ever  in a Mario game?), outfits! There's no question that Mario Odyssey is a must-own game if you have a Switch, so the question becomes is Odyssey alone a reason to get a Switch? Well, we don't need to know the answer to that, given a lot of other great releases since, but in 2017 it was enough to sell me!

## Sonic Mania

Depending on your point of view, Sega either "allowed" or "relied on" fan developers to make this game, and in turn that probably says good or bad things about them, respectively. But one thing that isn't up for debate is that everyone looking for some good classic Sonic loved this game. Truthfully, I've been too disinterested in 3D Sonic to experience it for myself, but from the outside it is clear the series has been in some pretty dire places. Even a lot of the newer 2D attempts fell flat, but this one knocked it out of the park.

The biggest weakness with Sonic Mania is that it's highly derivative, but that's also why it works. It would be a bit hypocritical of me to knock it points while listing Mega Man 9, as both games take the safe play of revitalizing something by returning to its roots. It was also hard for me to justify not listing it while listing the three core Genesis games. In a vacuum, Mania is probably the best of all, having a quarter century-ish of industry design lessons to apply for a super-polished product. But it also doesn't really have exhibit a lot of innovation over that time period either, even partially relying on remixed levels from those originals. Its greatest strength is simply being a nice nostalgia trip with a great mix of new surprises.

## Resident Evil 7

2017 was a big gaming year for me at the time, but Resident Evil 7 is one I didn't play until much later, being the last game I touched in a 2023 RE-blitz to familiarize myself more with the modern iterations of the series. RE7 is the one that kicked off the renaissance, following up the much-maligned number 6. It reboots the series into a first person take on what I assume is the classic RE style gameplay, with some modern conveniences like more forgiving saves on the standard difficulty. 

Horror games aren't exactly my favorite, but RE7 really struck a great balance for me in being tolerably scary and tense without feeling powerless. The gameplay sounds silly when you describe it - i.e. opening big doors with puzzle pieces - but these seemingly dated elements show why sometimes it can be good to look into gaming's past. I loved exploring the Baker estate, gradually progressing through and feeling the tension unfold in a place that becomes gradually more familiar and more hostile at the same time. There's a real intimacy and sense of atmosphere to the adventure, but it busts out some of those depraved and over-the-top RE moments at just the right times. As is oddly typical in RE, it does get a little weaker near the end as you become closer to the source of the conflict, but I can't say there were any disappointing moments throughout this creepy ride.