# Best Games of 2018

## Super Smash Bros. Ultimate

I'm going to get real here for a second: Since around the mid 20th century, in many ways, each successive generation has had it harder than the one before. Smash Ultimate is one of those rare instances where I envied kids who were in high school and college when it came out, imagining all the parties and dorm room sessions that this game must have brought. It's a shame that the most awesome Smash is my least-played to appear on this list. Even though it came out beyond my Smash prime, it's hard to leave it off. They got Castlevania. Banjo-Kazooie finally made it! There's even Sephiroth, and so on. 

SSBU is perhaps the single greatest celebration of gaming. The expected Smash polish is here, but the sheer amount of content is unbeatable. The ability to disable hazards or put any stage in Battlefield or Omega form is such a simple yet brilliant concept that adds so much value to the game. Now I don't have to be disappointed if my favorite games got an annoying stage, since I can just change its form, and if you like playing basic stages now you get to mix up the aesthetic more. I never got fully into all its single-player content, but it seems like there was an effort to add a lot here. 

Prior Smash games do have their charms and nuances that are occasionally worth going back to, but Ultimate is the closest thing I could imagine to being a definitive edition. About the only bad thing I could say (besides the low-hanging fruit that is the online play) is that, like with Mario Kart 8, they've reached such heights that it's hard to imagine where the series can even go from here.