# Best Games of 2019

## Super Mario Maker 2

This entry nearly approaches RollerCoaster Tycoon 2 levels of guilt, feeling somewhat like an expansion of the first game, but it's understandable since retaining the Mario visual styles is important. I only feel it's a semi-disappointing entry not because there weren't great additions, but a lot of them should've been in the first game to begin with. In any case, the new level biomes and vertical levels were much appreciated. There are also plenty of powerups and objectives I wasn't fully anticipating, and even an entire new style in 3D World which somehow translated really well to 2D. 

Still, a lot of the same mistakes were made with regard to difficulty finding levels and a deluge of poor quality creations. It was a little disappointing to no longer have the mystery mushroom, especially since the Switch still supports amiibo. Editing levels also didn't feel quite as good this time around, even with multiple control styles and the ability to use the touch screen (but sans stylus). Aside from those things (and a lack of SMM1 level import, perhaps due to said small differences), it's such a completely iterative entry that I'd consider it pretty much the definitive Mario Maker game.

Like the first game, it was also supported by a limited number of updates. It was a little disappointing to not see a full new mode (the menu appeared to have space for it), but content updates like the SMB2 mushroom are the kind of thing that really elevate it over the predecessor. The highlight for me was perhaps the least Mario related of all: the ability to transform into Link from Zelda 1, with a few creative liberties taken on his abilities. I think in the Switch era Nintendo has taken bigger swings with their games (often to fantastic results); putting Link in a Mario game feels like the kind of understated oddball move that was more common in the Wii U/3DS era, but it works out great, further highlighting the greatness of the various Mario mechanics. Even with all the surprises in SMM2, it didn't hit quite as hard as the first one did, but it's still a great way to explore both my and others' creativity.

## Resident Evil 2

There's definitely a case to be made that the modern gaming industry is too reliant on re-releases and remasters, but remakes? Surprisingly, we don't get that many of them, but if they were all done like Capcom's Resident Evil 2, hopefully others will pick up on the concept. Granted, I haven't played the original RE2 to compare, and I know some RE purists are divided on the directions the series has taken, but I started out with RE4. In 2005, let alone today, the thought of dealing with fixed camera angles, limitations on saving and other dated elements is untenable. The RE2 remake brings us the best of both worlds, taking the over the shoulder control style of the new(ish) games but being restrained on the action.

RE2 is probably the most tense one in the series I've played to date. Just because it has more shooter-like controls doesn't mean it's all about shooting. In the early game, I was filled with a constant anxiety over whether that zombie I shot was really dead for good, or if it even made sense to be shooting them at all. You zig-zag back and forth through the police station, so you always need to be on the lookout for new (or old) threats to surprise you. And just as you start building up an arsenal to feel safer, the invincible Mr. X starts stalking you through the station as you race to complete puzzles, the creepy tapping of boots constantly closing in from the distance.

The highlight of the game was definitely the police station, but as you progress beyond, it was nice to meet other characters. A lot of the familiar RE design and story tropes are here, but I was surprised to see a more personal and grounded story. Following in the footsteps of RE7, Capcom continues to dial down on the campiness the series is known for, but it still isn't completely afraid to embrace the sillier aspects. I was a little disappointed that Claire and Leon's alternate campaigns actually covered a lot of the same ground, but there are some nice little differences that make them worth experiencing for the story, plus a few changes in guns. It's a pretty short game, but with enough variety between campaigns for a nice little replayable package... that is, if I can get over my fear of hearing that THUMP THUMP again.

### Honorable Mentions

Yooka-Laylee and the Impossible Lair

The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening

Bloodstained: Ritual of the Night
