# Best Games of 2020

## Hades

Recent years have been a bit of a renaissance for the roguelike genre, but I always had a hard time getting into it. Granted, Hades is a rogue*lite*, but it helped me see the potential in short, randomized runs. Hades of course did not invent any of this, but it’s executed to perfection, avoiding a lot of the trappings of other games I’ve attempted in the genre. You collect various perks along the way, but instead of a guessing game of hundreds of items, they’re intuitive and give you small bonuses that can be stacked in interesting ways. Each of the main weapons are fun to use in their own way, imbuing a huge sense of variety to each run, with new challenges unfolding all the time.

Aside from the bite-sized appeal of playing a run or two at a time, the biggest strength of Hades is in the story. I re-learned so much about Greek mythology playing this, but it felt fresh with Supergiant’s detailed take on it. I was impressed at how seamlessly they put in so many dialogue paths, and even after playing a substantial amount I undoubtedly wasn’t even close to seeing it all. Despite a lack of big-money actors, the voices are used to great effect. It only took me a few lines of dialogue to get a sense of a character’s personality out of their tone and cadence—this of course is just describing what good voice acting is, but many games with a higher budget struggle to achieve it. No character, no matter how minor the role, feels like your typical irrelevant NPC thanks to this. Though I experienced my share of abortive runs, playing Hades never really felt like a waste of time due to the engaging combat, the drive to uncover more of the story, and even just the small moments of dialogue.

## Animal Crossing New Horizons

Animal Crossing New Horizons might be the hardest game on this list to discuss without delving into a big cliché, that being how it “arrived at the right time”, releasing right around the beginning of COVID lockdowns and all the uncertainty that ensued. But it was a great game to play for the time, because meeting up on a virtual island (if you can stomach Nintendo’s bad online) is much better than a Zoom meeting.

Never have I played a game for so many hours while accomplishing so little, but that’s exactly the point of life sims. It’s escapism at its truest core. Most of us long not to be able to wield magic or save the world from apocalypse, but live in an idyllic setting with little to no responsibilities other than an interest free loan paid off by fishing and smacking rocks. Not to mention everyone you live around wants to be your friend, to the point they’ll even regularly send letters despite living a two minute walk away.

Beyond that, ACNH gets at our desire to express our creativity, with a bunch of decorations and island/home design options. At first, I was annoyed at the lack of a tile editor or better inventory management, but slowly grew to understand the gamification of these elements. It is time consuming, but that’s part of the escape. Plus for as many hours as I put into this, it was so easy to bite them off in little chunks: a little bit before work, a little at lunch time, a little before going to bed. Though obviously not new to ACNH, the real-time clock added to the feeling of having your own parallel world to regularly attend to. Being that this was my first and only AC game, I can’t say if it is the best one, but I’m not torn up over being introduced to the series when I was.

## Final Fantasy VII Remake

For better or worse, this definitely was not what anybody could have been expecting for a remake of FF7. By only focusing on Midgar, I think we did get a lot out of arguably the strongest part of the story. Not everything works, as parts of the story get needlessly stretched and a few chapters are filled out with tedious sidequests. But I was impressed by how the anti-corporate and environmentalist messages weren’t sanitized and, if anything, are often even bolder. We see a more detailed depiction of the undercity class struggle; the fight between a bleak but outwardly stable corporate status quo and controversial radicalism to win over the people is very pertinent. 

The combat is much more fun than the strict turn-based (often random) battles of the original, even if at times bosses get overlong, and there is still an element of trial and error to equipping materia ahead of a fight. The voice acting is good most of the time, and especially at key times, and many of the action sequences in the cutscenes are incredible, even if it’s just flashy. I don’t think anyone would say this is some low-rent experience, regardless of anything else they may feel about it.

Overall, there is a lot I love about FF7R, but I don’t think its position is as strong as the original on my top 100. While it hits a lot of the right emotional notes, and they are typically enhanced by the modern presentation, I can’t help but feel it’s standing on the shoulders of giants here. The late game also left me worried a bit about future installments going off the rails, but I know of course those should be ranked on their own. At least for now, FF7R was a fun ride seeing the gang brought to life in a new manner, with some of the highs and lows I’ve mostly learned to accept out of absurd JRPG fantasy.

### Honorable Mentions

Astro's Playroom

Ori and the Will of the Wisps