# Best Games of 2021

## Metroid Dread

The Metroid series has had a pretty bleak outlook since the late 2000s. Even though we eventually got 2017’s Samus Returns, that was a game that felt a bit like it came and went. Then Metroid Dread came out somewhat out of nowhere, not even being the new Metroid game people had been waiting for… or at least, not the one that had previously been announced (Prime 4). Some might say that they’re always waiting for 2D Metroid, announced or not, and it was once again easy to see why. 

By 2021, being flush with indie successors, making a 2D Metroid stand out was not an easy task, but MercurySteam succeeded by handling this with a lot of love and care. The EMMI chases, though at times frustrating, not only upped the tension but gave the game a memorable point that will help it stand out for years to come. Much of the rest of the game is pretty standard Metroid fare, but if it ain’t broke don’t fix it. There are some nice quality of life innovations here, like the ability to see individual blocks on the map once you’ve revealed them. It makes it much easier to know where to go back to with a certain ability without cheapening the exploration. It also extensively hides secrets behind techniques like the shinespark, doing much more to teach you these than any game before. The movement is remarkably smooth. And they threw in enough fanservice for long-time fans without overdoing it; I found myself awed at a couple surprises I came across. Metroid Dread is definitely a worthy addition in a now crowded genre.

### Honorable Mentions

Ratchet and Clank: Rift Apart