# Best Games of 2022

## Elden Ring

NOTE: I decided to rewrite this review since the original one was rushed a bit. Now that I've actually beaten the game, this is my review:

Elden Ring is an instant classic that is yet also a familiar experience. There are a lot of things that make it great, but the glue that holds it all together is what's been at the core of From Software's Souls-likes. It probably didn't even need to be open world, strictly speaking - there is still that sense of a proper order to doing things, and the game does have gates to progress. The nice thing about the open world, as mentioned in my original review, is that there are many paths you can take to look for advantages, level up or just hone your skills. What I undersold in the original review is that there are many advantages that have been added or streamlined compared to previous games, such as summons, ashes of war, mixed physick, crafting and easier smithing. That's what "easy mode" is in these games, and ER probably has the most of these options, although that doesn't necessarily mean it's the easiest one.

It can take a while to get into, but the gameplay loop of trying to perfect your combat encounters is very satisfying when you hit a groove. What really impresses me in ER is the level design, with the way shortcuts and loot are teased to the player and often you need to piece together spatial clues to get to them. But again, this is something present in past FromSoft games. My opinion of ER has still raised considerably, because it executes this established formula almost perfectly. It might raise even more in the future, as playing ER itself often invoked memories of Dark Souls for me. Souls games are perhaps something like the concept of "Type II" fun - something that can be difficult in the moment, but making for fond memories, and ER is sure to have lots of memorable sequences for me. But admittedly it was also a lot of fun in the moment.

### Original Review

This is the game that made me question this whole project, as it landed here by default, being the only game I've played from this year as of this writing. There are other potential interesting releases I might get around to eventually, but I think this will be generally be remembered as a year the industry really felt the effects of Covid. Even a look at the Wikipedia page of top reviewed games for the year reveals a lot of re-releases of various forms.

Whether it would have made it onto the list regardless is hard for me to say. I put Dark Souls down for 2011, so I don't have a complete distaste for the genre. But when I played Elden Ring (keeping in mind I haven't played all the intervening entries yet), I couldn't help but feel that From Software hasn't changed much in over a decade. And really, why should they? Their games have a big following, and I'm not the core audience, even if I like them somewhat.

The big change with ER is that it is structurally open world, as it still leans on the typical FromSoft combat mechanics. The advantage of an open world is there is less rote grinding, as you can just go to a new area and gain runes that way, but in true FromSoft fashion, they are wise to the player's tricks. The bosses have so much more dynamic movesets that I had an even more difficult time than usual trying to keep up, and grinding can only save you so much.

To me, the best thing about FromSoft's approach is not the notorious difficulty but the other ways it rejects AAA norms. Their games are hard to truly hate as a result, but a certain point you have to ask yourself how much you can tolerate repeating certain sections over and over again. Many people appreciated this kind of difficulty in games of the past, but it's one thing when it's used to stretch out a four hour long game, not ones that push 100.

I don't think an easy mode is the answer, but I feel like FromSoft games tend to be about 10% harder than they need to be. Yet I see a small but loud minority who think even the _current_ difficulty of their games is too easy. I'm sure FromSoft isn't capitulating to those prideful, gatekeeping gamers specifically, but they have stuck to their guns on challenge, and as a result made some interesting experiences perhaps at the expense of a wider audience. Or at least I thought so, until ER became a true megahit. Maybe that is a result of the lean 2022, or I'm wrong and this review can be summed up as: "It's too hawwwwd!"
