# Best Games of 2023

## Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom

Tears of the Kingdom was destined to be on this list long before I even knew I was making the list, when Nintendo graced us with the simple words: "The sequel to The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild is now in development". Any new Zelda is cause for hype, and usually comes with a new version of Link, but given how things went the last time Nintendo decided to reuse assets and characters for a direct sequel, that might have made me even more hyped. There was some controversy over the decision to reuse the same world, and many of the early trailers didn't show a lot, but I didn't need to see a whole lot more - and my faith that there would be plenty of surprises to see would be rewarded.

The upside to building directly on BotW is that everything that was good about it is still here, but so much more was added. While there's still a case to be made for a brand new world, I enjoyed discovering all the changes to the places I had come to know, and there are many new locales in other forms. The sky is a nice redemption arc from Skyward Sword, proving that there were good ideas hiding in it that just weren't executed properly. The depths took me by complete surprise, and although eventually a bit tiresome, it was amazing to find myself in that hostile world at first, slowly learning its secrets and connections to the surface. Together these different "levels" of the map form a whole second, albeit non-traditional world's worth of content to explore in addition to the familiar surface.

I wasn't sure if shrines would make a return, but they ended up having even more. Just like BotW, there were a few weak ones, but the puzzles were even better. The rune abilities in TotK build on the ones from BotW while being completely different at the same time. I'm still sitting on a lot of potential I haven't fully explored with Ultrahand, but got to experience all the Zonai devices via bite sized puzzles throughout the game. The shrine puzzles in particular have this amazing sense of freedom, where it feels like there is no clear correct solution, to the point that doing it "wrong" feels like it's right. Even in the overworld, some of the puzzles just to get a treasure chest are better than any puzzle in the entirety of many other AAA games.

For me, the highlight of the new additions might be the caves, which take a different approach to the "mini dungeon" concept in comparison to shrines. In a shrine, you get teleported to a magical enclosure to most likely solve a puzzle for a known prize. The caves have much more variance, where you might get a long or short one; it might lean more into puzzles or combat or exploration; the prizes could just be some ores or you might find an outfit piece you can't get anywhere else, all while being in a space physically integrated with the game world. The other thing I loved about the caves is how they show Nintendo must have gotten design inspiration from all over the series, as I think of them as more of a 2D Zelda staple. They have been awkwardly attempted in 3D before, but this feels like the first time they really translated the concept over properly.

Even the story was surprisingly more memorable for me than BotW. It certainly isn't the most intricate narrative you can find in video games, and there are still problems with the dialogue and acting, but it's kind of like Star Wars in that regard. It's a classic tale of epic heroism, with those moments that throw a dramatic emotional weight behind them to keep you into it. Finding the memories themselves might have been a minor downgrade over BotW, but the cutscenes made them worthwhile. There's a similar approach with the boss fights, which aren't always the most difficult, but they're punctuated with cinematic gameplay moments that make them thrilling in a way BotW wasn't.

Just like my BotW review, it's hard to succinctly mention all the amazing things about this game, and I am well aware I've missed some. Suffice it to say, in an era of my life where completing video games can often feel like a chore, TotK reminded me what it truly felt like to get engrossed in something. Rather than forcing myself to play the game, I had to remind myself to _stop_ sometimes, even after hours-long play days where real-life responsibilities were partially shirked. It was the kind of game where even after dozens of long sessions, I'd still make some cool discovery each time I played it. 

If there's any overarching flaw with TotK it might be excess - after a while the amount of shrines, caves and lightroots became a bit tedious, though ultimately I can't say I regretted doing them (at least for one playthrough). Perhaps this can be blamed on pressure to expand on the reused world, but I hope the next Zelda will dial down and combine some of these elements. The size is also not necessary because great mechanics like Ultrahand provide lots of replay value on their own. I wanted to build some cool stuff but ended up barely doing it with how many hours the rest of the game took out of me. But it'll certainly still be there whenever I decide to come back to the game, and oh boy is it worth going back to.

### Honorable Mentions

Resident Evil 4

Super Mario Bros. Wonder