# 2024 Gaming Year in Review

This is a year for video games

## Jump to Review

## Mario and Luigi: Superstar Saga

I got through about half of this game until I ran up on the release of the next one on this list, and by the time I could've gone back to it, I decided there wasn't much need to continue. This is the kind of game I played more the sake of being able to say I played it, which is what I've been trying to do less of this year. I am a medium-sized fan of both Paper Mario and Super Mario RPG, so I thought it would be good to see what the third style of Mario RPG was like, and I did get a decent enough idea of it in the limited time.

It was interesting to learn that developer AlphaDream was formed in part with ex-Square developers, and it shows in ways that I don't know how to explain. At first I was basking in the Square/SNES-like nostalgia, but it wasn't enough to carry a game that can get boring. I'm not sure if it really does anything worse than the other light-hearted Mario RPG games, but my tolerance for them might be lower now. M&L leans even more into the timed action concept than its counterparts, which I would've figured is a logical to place to take them, but I'm not so sure after playing it. The badges felt even more simple, and the timed actions make (almost?) any battle possible to do without taking damage. That's not to say getting a perfect battle is easy, as the most challenging and interesting thing about the game is the simultanoues character control, but overall it's clearly meant to be a lighter game. The first Paper Mario's battle system already felt more untraditional in comparison to SMRPG, but M&L takes it even further. And with a silly but low-stakes story, as to be expected, this one is another game that's perfectly fine but not essential.

## Final Fantasy VII Rebirth

Final Fantasy VII Rebirth is a game that I had pretty clear expectations for, in that it would probably have the things I liked about FF7 Remake but also some things that I disliked. And my expectations were pretty much correct, so a lot of my sentiment towards Rebirth can be summed up with my Remake review (Top 100 Games for 2020). But just because it had a lot of those same things in place doesn't mean there wasn't a lot added.

Early on, I almost rolled my eyes seeing yellow paint climb holds, tower-climbing, quest-filled open maps and item crafting, gameplay elements that were already outdated in the 2020 predecessor that managed to avoid them. But perhaps "outdated" is a bit unfair - they are a bit cliche in AAA, but serve their purpose. Rebirth doesn't break the mold as an open world game, and arguably isn't even _that_ open world with the way it's sectioned off, but that can also strengthen it by making the sometimes checklist-y quest items managed by region. I did enjoy exploring on Chocobo even if it's just another take on a horse, but they gave them a few special abilities that were nice. 

Just like Remake, it does lean heavily on the strength of the source material, but it does avoid the very possible trap of screwing it up. There are certain times maybe it can lack in subtlety compared to the original, plus some confusing stuff, but it makes up for it with mostly good added and expanded material. 

Rebirth isn't all that revolutionary in general, but it might be a potential all-timer just for all the things it throws at you. A lot of big budget games lately either find the one thing they're good at and stick with it, or they're open world games that repeat various shallow content all over. Rebirth obviously is closer to the latter, but it's far from the worst example of tedious open world tasks, as the story payoff can often be good worldbuilding, and a lot of it is close enough to the main path. But aside from the usual open world elements, Rebirth has a lot more, and it feels like a throwback with all the minigames honoring the original's legacy. With one exception (Queen's Blood, and _maybe_ Chocobo racing), the minigames are all fun but not great, the kind of thing you'd play just for the main game objectives but not get wrapped up in otherwise. Yet I'm not sure I'd have it any other way, as it makes them just minor distractions in the game that don't demand too much of your time when you see one, though collectively add up in the experience.

Rebirth is full of silly elements aside from the minigames, and that's the charm of it. It knows when to be serious, and the themes are ever resonant. But it's not the kind of game that is so self-serious it is afraid to have too much fun at its own expense. Sometimes Rebirth moments can be a little corny, campy or gratuitous, but only within the context of themselves; they don't spoil any of the bigger picture, and it's hard to even imagine it at all without them.

## New Super Luigi U

After playing Super Mario Bros. Wonder last year, I wanted to go back to New Super Mario Bros. and see if I was being unfair with it. This is my compromise on doing so, as I never played the Luigi levels, so it let me experience something a little new too. And to be fair, there are some pretty creative levels, but it takes a few worlds to get going. SMBW would hit you with unique things right off the bat, but NSLU does a lot of easing into the familiar world of Mario with lots of early levels that feel "tile designed" in their simplicity. And even once the more creative levels hit, they just aren't as common or as memorable as SMBW.

A gripe I have with NSLU in particular is that, although the levels are shortened to 100 seconds, most of them do feel like scaled down regular Mario levels. They aren't as expansive, but they still have you exploring and stopping to think about star coins to some degree. The time limit is more there to make you _feel_ rushed than an actual challenge to overcome. Given the short time limit I would've liked to see more levels that focus on speed and timing jumps to keep your momementum, but there were very few. Additionally, Luigi's unique mechanics are rarely, if ever, tested outside of optional objectives in a level; I would've liked to see some sections where you realize you have to make an extra high or long jump to proceed. 

The short pace of the levels also means you don't get a lot of time to really master their gimmicks, or remember them for long after. The base NSMBU is likely a little better, though also largely forgettable. These are the kind of games I don't mind having played once, but I'd rather just replay Super Mario 3 or World if I'm in the mood for 2D Mario. And now, for a modern take, SMBW gives us a much better looking and diverse take on it. There are very faint glimpses of that in NSLU, but it's mostly an okay additional set of challenges for NSMBU that is afraid to fully break free from its base game's conventions.
