# 2023 Gaming Year in Review

After I started writing my top 100 games list, I felt like there were more games I wanted to write things about. Then it kind of just turned into this idea that I might as well write about them while they're still fresh on my mind, turning it into a little catalog of stuff I've played each year. It's a little daunting to review almost every game you've played, but I only plan to do it going forward, and a little review at a time after playing something is manageable.

2023 will probably go down as one of the best years ever in gaming, but like pretty much every year for the past decade, I spent a lot of my gaming time on seemingly endless massive backlog instead. I've had a tendency to be a generation or two behind, but as the current generation tends to move slowly (at least until this year), there has been a bit of time to catch up, as well as time to let go entirely of some of those games that have been buried in the backlog for years. 

This is also a time when companies have been leaning more than ever into subscription-based gaming, much to my chagrin. After the PlayStation Plus price increase was announced, I decided not to renew, and ended up trying to get through a good portion of that collection with my remaining time. Gaming on a deadline can be a curse, but also a bit of a blessing, as many of them proved to be worth my time, and as a hesitant decision maker they made some decisions for me on what to play.

Nonetheless, even by my standards it was a big year for new games in 2023. First I got a remake of what's probably one of my top 10 games of all time. And then just a couple months later, I got the game that was destined to be not just my 2023 GotY but the best game I played in 2023 period.

Within each section, games are listed in approximate chronological order of when I played them.

## The Main Attractions

This section is for significant games in my backlog (regardless of source) and major new releases.

### Uncharted 1-3

The Uncharted games are basically a tomb raiding action movie in video game form, which is both a compliment and a criticism. Nathan Drake is Indiana Jones, only instead of an occasional scholar he seems to be strictly a pirate, and instead of fighting Nazis he fights rival thugs, and instead of killing a few of them he kills thousands. One of the best things about the games is the ambitious action set pieces, if you can stomach all of the swallowing your disbelief at sequences that make Hollywood look downright realistic in comparison. Another strength is the dialogue and character interactions, which do elevate the potential of a medium that was historically clunky in that regard, but still has a long way to go to match cinema.

Even the way much of the game plays out is like a movie, in that your inputs make little difference. It's tolerable because of all the action going on around you, but I unfortunately think Uncharted (or maybe it was Assassin's Creed) is largely responsible for the proliferation of "hold forward" climbing in modern games. Most of the gameplay excitement comes from the shootouts, but even they are super streamlined, with a cover based mechanic that makes heavy use of aim assist, and a lack of weapon management since you are frequently made to start over and recollect guns. I had a solid amount of fun with these, but still overall prefer shooters based more around constant movement.

I grouped all these together because, honestly, they are pretty much the same game. The first one is definitely the weakest, as the layouts of the shooting sequences are more haphazard, and enemies have a tendency to blend into the background too much. Number 2 considerably improves on this, but the improvements only got even smaller from there. A lot of the basic story tropes and outline even repeat across games. I was almost convinced 3 was the best, but by the end some of the action sequences started to feel like retreads of things done in 2. In 3 they also try to give some more backstory, but I felt it stopped short of convincingly explaining what drives Drake's psychotic adventuring. As of this writing I'm not yet sure what's in store with the 4th game, but it was disappointing that the first three didn't really improve on the formula over time.

### Final Fantasy 7 Remake

See entry in Top 100

### Batman: Arkham Asylum

I'm not sure what compelled me to play this in 2023, other than it was a part of my long Xbox 360 backlog, and some amount of guilt over owning too many unplayed games sets in. I'm  not a big Batman or superhero fan, but I understood it to be a good game, and sometimes that's enough for me.

AA wasn't the most interesting game in this day and age, but it's far less dated than many of its contemporaries. Aiding in its relevance is the Metroid-like structure, still a largely unexplored genre in 3D. Coming from a weak release year, I even contemplated a place for it in the Top 100, but as I write this now and already struggle to remember much to say, it feels right to have left it off. It does a nice job of mining a lot from the Batman canon if that's your thing. The stealth based no-kill combat was also a change of pace, though led to its fair share of frustrating moments. I'm reminded a bit too much of the late 2000s gritty gaming zeitgeist, though at least in Batman the grittiness makes sense. Overall, a pretty fun game that wasn't the worst thing from that era I could've gone back to.

### Resident Evil 2 (2019)

See entry in Top 100

### Resident Evil 3 (2020)

Sandwiched between two great remakes starring Leon Kennedy, RE3 also meets somewhere in the middle of their atmosphere and play style, and it doesn't really work. The more actiony vibe compared to 2 robs it a lot of the suspense, while lacking the exciting potential of 4's various abilities. Nemesis is a much faster and more mobile foe than the Tyrant/Mr. X from 2, but I found Mr. X to be much scarier the way you didn't always know exactly where he was lurking. In 3, I quickly realized how on-rails the encounters were, and mostly just amount to running out the encounter. That feeling of a constant threat pressuring you to navigate your surroundings efficiently was gone.

RE3 was still fun, but it's hard to picture myself having a reason to replay it. The story was also a big downgrade, lacking the character intimacy of 2. Then there's the extremely predictable two-faced squad member and downer ending. While I would assume some of these problems can be attributed to the original game, it still feels like a half-assed take on a good formula.

### Ratchet and Clank (2016)

Amazingly, the first R&C game I ever played was the newest, 2021's Rift Apart. Ironically, there's a chance I might enjoy one of the earlier R&C games more, as playing R&C 2016 wasn't different _enough_, good or bad, to feel like much more than a stripped down version of Rift Apart.  Nonetheless, it was a nice little short game to break up all the scary and gory Resident Evils, so I accomplished my goal playing it. It's mindless action in a good way. The part that stood out to me most was there were some more flying vehicle sections than Rift Apart, so that is one nice thing. 

### Resident Evil 4 (2023)

When the RE4 remake was announced, I decided to do something a little different: the original was one of my favorite games of all time, so what did I really need to know about the remake? I hadn't yet played any of the other RE remakes, but I knew they were popular enough to be confident this wouldn't be a total botch job. So after seeing approximately zero pre-release footage or info, I got this on release, and quickly went through it.

I'm still debating about how much I truly enjoyed it, but it will no doubt receive a few replays over time like the original. A lot of my feelings turned out to be the opposite of my expectations, particularly after I revisited the original. For example, Leon having more mobility and modern controls sounded great on paper, but there was so much nerfing everywhere else - weightier guns, weaker melee, knives with durability. It was still lots of fun, but I went back to the original and it was so easy to line up headshots; there's this nice snappy, arcadey feel.

In contrast, I gotta give RE4R a surprising amount of credit in streamlining the overall level design. I remember as I was going through and first thinking, "Wait, wasn't there something different here?" and being a bit worried, then gradually noticing more and more cut content. It was a bit distressing, but again my opinion flipped after revisiting the original - most of the cut sections were pretty bad, or didn't make much sense. The remake adds and expands in a fair share of places, too.

Tonally, RE4R removes a lot of lines from the original - most being justified, and many in particular being _dated_, but a lot of the fun cheesiness is gone. However, in true modern gaming fashion, Leon is much more talkative, and spews action hero lines during gameplay instead of just in cutscenes. And it's hard to say anything bad about the new characterization of Ashley. The revamped shooting gallery is an absolute delight, recapturing the goofy spirit of the merchant in a new way. I'm not sure that RE4R fully lived up to my expectations as the definitive version, but the upside is we now have two different ones that have their place.

### BioShock 2

Like the Arkham series, BioShock is another one of the canonized Important Games of the late aughts/early 2010s, and also one that was a bit of a disappointment. Sometimes, I wonder if I just don't get it, or games have become dated at an increasingly rapid pace. The BioShock games in particular are weird ones to visit for the first time in the 2020s. They aren't _bad_ games, but it's easy to pick on them after hearing some of the haughty praise that came out around their time. Am I dumb and missing the point, or are they really not that deep? Were they the product of an industry that was desperate to legitimize itself as art, and needed something to latch onto?

At their core, I think the first two BioShocks are about it what it means to lose one's humanity. This is played out literally in the way characters are mutated by plasmids and ADAM, but mostly figuratively through the lens of two competing ideologies at the extremes of trying to dictate human behavior. It's surely a bigger concept than a lot of games, but I left both feeling like they didn't have much to say. The message I gleaned between the two was "individuality is important but constant competition will also lead to ruin", and it didn't exactly lead to any deep re-examinations of humanity.

The gameplay is somewhere between an FPS and an RPG, with a limited upgrade tree and special abilities. I like the abilities in theory, but they never feel as powerful as they should. The telekinesis for example is like a heavily nerfed gravity gun from Half-Life 2. The gunplay is much weightier than a more pure FPS, but the RPG elements aren't really deep enough to provide a super customizable experience.

The great potential for gaming is with non-linear storytelling, but I think this is best done by having a collection of characters and quests you can interact with. The BioShock approach is to litter the linear world with audio logs, which is not only an extremely played out mechanic (though surely less so at the time), but also distances you from the side characters. Outside of the main story beats I found my reaction to most things was "yeah whatever".

Most of this review could apply to 1 or 2, but they are very similar games. I did like some of the iterative improvements in 2, but I'm not sure they are enough to make it a better game than 1 given the expectations for a sequel. I was very annoyed with the lack of changes to manually looting items. The guns were slightly more fun, but generally provide the same functions as before. The new hacking was nice, but it's such a small change. If I do decide to play Infinite after this, I know at least we'll be leaving the bottom of the sea, so what other new things could be in store?

### The Witcher 3

There is a certain modern game design maximalism trend, which I’ve come to despise, that is perhaps best exemplified by the open world genre. It’s hard for me to avoid comparing any open world games to Zelda, as it now has two outstanding modern iterations.  Both Zelda and TW3 are games where you pick up insane amounts of stuff off the ground, but in Zelda you’re incentivized to use it. You throw ingredients into a cooking pot, or fuse something to a weapon to make it stronger. It’s intuitive and imprecise (in a good way). So many games get caught up in the idea of squeezing _effort_ out of their mechanics rather than _fun_. If you want to craft a weapon or a potion in TW3, first you need to learn the recipe for it, then have the exact set of ingredients, which are extremely difficult to keep track of. Then it often turns out to do something like give you a 2% chance to freeze buff, which no person in their right mind would think is an actual fun thing in a game, but AAA marketing has told us these varieties of uber-precise min-maxing opportunities are “deep” gameplay. Beyond that, there is a lot of your standard open world/RPG stuff: adequate but not really exciting horse-riding and combat, bandit camps and loot caches dotted all over the map, and the inane Witcher sense that could only be very loosely considered a "puzzle".

Obviously, it’s not lost on me that TW3 does offer a lot that similar games don’t in the story department. But my biggest praise and my biggest criticism of the game might be one and the same: the most enjoyment I got out of it was sitting through dialogues. After coming to that realization, I thought couldn’t they have just made this a TV show? Perhaps a book series? Joking aside… that really is how I feel about it. Of course I understand that a game lends itself to choices that affect he narrative, but to me the best choices in a game should be driven by how they affect the gameplay, and that just gets back to how the gameplay offered me nothing exciting.  Ultimately I think I put around a dozen hours into this, not a lot by open world game standards, but enough that I feel like I got the general idea of what I’d be in for from a gameplay perspective. Even having tentatively given up on it, I still go back in forth in my mind as to whether that’s the right decision, but that may just be owed to my stubborn nature. On the other hand, it is a widely acclaimed game, and that tends to merit a longer leash. At least putting my thoughts into writing helps me find a little bit of closure. Am I wrong on this one, or the critics? Or has time just passed it by, and I experienced it too late?

### The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom

See entry in Top 100

### Elden Ring

See entry in Top 100

### Axiom Verge 2

In the vast sea of indie Metroidvanias, Axiom Verge lies somewhere in the middle. While your Oris and Hollow Knights are more ambitious projects that feel like a distant relative of Metroid, developer Thomas Happ took the Shovel Knight approach of cramming it with mechanics lifted from well-known classics of yore. Its design inspirations are quite obvious to veterans of the genre, and for better or worse it will feel right at home. It's well-designed, but safe and lacking in innovation. _Unlike_ Shovel Knight, Axiom Verge is severely hampered by a lack of a strong identity: the characters are nondescript, the music is atmospheric but not particularly catchy, and the dialogue and visuals are overcomplicated instead of punchy.

To be clear, this is all describing the first game, but none of these flaws were really fixed in #2. I think I enjoyed it a little more than 1, but that could just be since it's fresher in my memory. The levels feel a little more open, the story more ambitious and the abilities more customizable, but it's overall a lot of the same. One big change is a focus on melee combat, which I think was a good move in theory, but rarely ever feels that great in this - luckily you can skip most of it. The other most significant difference is the greater emphasis on a dual-world concept, which is a highlight that recalls games like A Link to the Past. There are a few moments where I found myself confused with backtracking, but I thought overall it was pretty sensible with the world design and progression. I did get pretty into playing it, as this kind of game is good gaming "comfort food", even if I didn't come out all that impressed. Like the first one, it seems destined for me to largely forget it within a few years, but not bad for a recent indie that was made free on PlayStation Plus.

### Sackboy: A Big Adventure

Another PS+ game, I was familiar with Sackboy, but never had any PS consoles to play a Little Big Planet game on. Platformers are a domain I'm obviously quite familiar with, but how does Sony stack up? Based on this one: pretty well. While I think it will ultimately go down as a fairly forgettable game for me, it generally does the expected things right. The most fun is in the costumes and the top-notch world design, where levels are made out of appliances, electronics and other inanimate objects. The level design can take a while to get going but there are some clever ones later on, and the game is short on frustrating moments. It does have the annoying aspect of locking progress behind collectibles, which is strangely common in linear platformers now, but thankfully I didn't actually hit a bottleneck til the postgame.

The annoying thing about this, of course, is the need to repeat levels if you have to come back for orbs you missed. And again, many games are like this, but I'm not sure Sackboy is of the caliber that made me want to dive back in. I had my fun going through it once, but the levels aren't groundbreaking enough, and the control can be annoying at times. It controls well, but you move incredibly slow, outside of using a cumbersome roll move. I also felt like this game wasn't really meant to be played solo, and while you can go online for co-op, nothing beats local multiplayer, which wasn't a possibility at the time I played. Nonetheless, even alone I still got some decent gaming time out of it for a quick and easy one.

### The Last Guardian

I went into The Last Guardian without the highest of expectations, but nevertheless interested in one of the few Japanese-developed games in the modern Sony catalog. In one sense, it delivered on the promise there, with an artful world and epic yet intimate tale. But it's hard for a game to be great on that alone, and TLG doesn't have a whole lot else going for it.

The long development cycle on this shows, as it's dated in many areas. The control is subpar across the board: climbing on or off things can be difficult, mirror aiming can't be inverted, and of course there's getting Trico to obey commands. But even fundamentals like moving feel slippery, jumps are easily missed and the camera finds itself in strange places. The graphics are often saved by the look of distant vistas, but otherwise are very unremarkable for PS4 standards.

A big portion of the game is climbing around as the boy, which felt surprisingly Western-influenced, though I actually found the climbing scenarios more interesting than many contemporaries, controls aside. They are interesting because paths are not overly obvious, but that ambiguity hurts the game in a lot of other places, where another good chunk is spent on jumping around on Trico's back. It's often unclear where you can jump, and there is a lot of waiting around for Trico to get lined up - perhaps an intentional attempt to convey the difficulty of working with an animal, but it gets old fast.

Almost all the rest of the game is combat and puzzles. I will say the combat is better than it sounds on paper, but it is ultimately just a lot of waiting on Trico to do his thing. The puzzles, unfortunately, are where the game might falter the most. They have a tendency to either be too obvious or too esoteric to be satisfying. Except near the very end, it feels like there is very little building on previous techniques. There are a lot of arbitrary puzzles introduced with a lack of any prior context. 

I found myself reaching for a guide often in this one, even tempted at times to watch a playthrough, which I've never done as a way to complete a game. I'm glad I stuck it through, but there is little variation to how you can approach the game, and not much fun in solving the puzzles on your own. The most impressive thing is probably the animations of mannerisms for Trico, but they might have spent a little _too_ much effort here and not on the rest of the game. I left satisfied with the story, but unsure it was worth everything else involved.

### Metroid II

The rare retro game I am elevating to this section, I ended up starting this game at an airport without full access to my games, but nonetheless it was on on my (informal) gaming bucket list. I played pretty much every "proper" Metroid to this point (including this one's own remake), but 2 is one I was missing. It certainly isn't the all-time classic some of its brethren are, but it was a solid experience and one of the best I've played on Game Boy.

There are a lot of gameplay improvements over the original Metroid, mostly with the map design, and some items like the space jump I previously thought debuted in Super Metroid. Then some things are still annoying, like being unable to stack beams or select them in a menu. There's also the lack of a map, but at least the game is more linear, as you go around clearing a section at a time of Metroids. I don't think I _badly_ needed a map, but it's the kind of game you need to play through a in a short period so you don't forget where you were going. 

This could've been alleviated by, for example, placing save points at the start of each section as a good stopping point, but it has those kind of dated issues. Aside from the save points, missile and healing items tend to be placed pretty inconsistently as well, and enemy drops for the same can be stingy at times. But at least the game _has_ save and healing points, another upgrade over the first. These are pretty expected issues with a game this age, so the thing that disappointed me most overall is that the music is pretty bad/nonexistent. 

Other than that, it's a very well-designed game. It takes advantage of the limited capabilities of the console to still deliver typical Metroid platforming and exploration challenges. As I got further along, I started realizing some of the subtle navigation cues were pretty clever, like how enemy types can signify changes between sections. Not bad for a sophomore effort in a series that had even greater things to come.

### Resident Evil 7

See entry in Top 100

### Star Wars: Jedi Fallen Order

Star Wars: Jedi Fallen Order is a game that, on paper, I shouldn't have liked as much as I did. Right off the bat it hits you with a lot of (predominantly Western) "AAAisms" as you go through an Uncharted-esque action sequence, cinematically jumping and climbing through some scripted platforming, as your character quips throughout, until you get hit with a long and detailed cutscene. These are not inherently bad things, but ones that to me often signal a game that prioritizes its presentation over mechanics. Luckily, first impressions can be deceiving sometimes.

Once you get past the prologue, JFO opens up more as something of a 3D Metroidvania with Souls-inspired combat. It isn't the most innovative game, but structurally has a lot of things I like regarding the way you build up over time, with new abilities opening up possibilities, and a simplified character upgrade system compared to proper Souls. The platforming is pretty forgiving, but still requires some degree of precision and timing, which is more than can be said of a lot of AAA games. Likewise, while the puzzles aren't amazing, they were satisfying enough since they required a lot more thought than many contemporaries. The combat does have some hiccups (not having a dedicated button and animation for parries makes them tricky), but has some fun elements like throwing enemies into each other with the Force. I'm more of a casual Star Wars fan, but the story made for a surprisingly nice piece of Star Wars media when I was still feeling the sting of the sequel trilogy.

### The Last of Us

When I went to play The Last of Us, I was afraid it was just going to be Sad Uncharted. From the start, I was impressed by the more in-depth combat that includes stealth, crafting and permanent upgrades, though it also just further emphasized to me how Uncharted gameplay didn't evolve much from 1-3. The contrast was welcome in any case, but on a broader scale it's not particularly impressive from a gameplay standpoint. The real reason to play TLoU is the hauntingly beautiful atmosphere of overgrown apocalypse, but more importantly - and expectedly at this point - the top-notch dialogue and characters.

TLoU is a story of loss and desperation, but it wasn't entirely sad in the ways I was expecting. The real tragedy for me was watching yourself become the villain. In video games, the hero is often of dubious character when you think about the violence they inflict, but it's usually understood that the ends justifies the means. TLoU turns this on its head a bit, not only making the violence feel uncomfortable all along, but also throwing a late-game wrench in this familiar trope. The bond between Joel and Ellie is a key part of the humanity of the story, but also the inhumanity as Joel gradually grows psychopathically violent and turns his heroic mission around at the final hour. 

I was less than satisfied at the end, but that kind of subversion is perhaps why TLoU caught on. And of course the story and acting leading up to it are still great, but one wonders the value of a game where such things supersede the _game_ aspect. It isn't uncommon for games to let you be the bad guy, and typically admonish you for it, but in TLoU it merely plays out regardless of what you would rather choose. The game does make sure you understand Joel's motivations, but as one who doesn't agree with them, I left feeling a bit like I was merely _advancing_ the story rather than _playing_ it.

### Uncharted 4

If you've read up to this point, you can probably tell I'm a bit skeptical of Naughty Dog's linear cinematic action games, but seeing Nathan Drake and co. go next gen (which is now last-gen) sounded promising... and it was. A lot of the core Uncharted formula is still here, but it's revamped to a point that it eclipses 1-3 nearly across the board.

To start with maybe the one area that _wasn't_ an improvement, I felt like the guns were oddly weak in this game. For 1-3 that would be a death knell, but the amount of shootouts is toned down considerably, and the seemingly nerfed weapons were likely made to encourage using the much-improved stealth. The lack of shooting sequences also works because the pacing is so much better. 

It's still a very linear game, but you get a lot more open areas that move away from that on-rails feeling of hopping from climb to climb. Though on that note, after four games, ND really honed in on how to make the climbs just subtle yet obvious enough. Of course, the addition of the grappling hook and slopes brings a nice dimension, even if most of the climbing is still for show. I wouldn't forget to mention the addition of vehicles, which are a big boon for both the pacing and the larger environments. And for what it's worth, while the story was already a strength, they even managed to outdo themselves there, with the introduction of Nate's brother and a more memorable villain than the often arbitrary bad guys of past games. And just when they finally sold me on the series, they made the bold decision to put an end to Nathan Drake's story - but you gotta admire how rare it is in the industry to quit while you're ahead.

### Super Mario Bros. Wonder

When Super Mario Bros. Wonder was first revealed, I thought "Oh this is just New Super Mario Bros. with a new name." The 2D Mario series had a lot of competent but forgettable entries for over a decade while the shift to 3D was clearly a priority. It made sense to be skeptical, but eventually the hype for SMBW was too much to ignore. While 2D Mario might not ever be able to top its own classics, or get the same sheen as a 3D outing, SMBW was its best 2D entry (excluding Mario Makers) since the SNES days.

SMBW is immediately different from the NSMB series, and makes it even more perplexing in hindsight. NSMB was often overly restrained in its design for such an established series. They start with several basic grassland levels and simple Goombas and Koopas, as if they still had the tile limitations of old and didn't trust players to be familiar with Mario. Perhaps taking some cues from Donkey Kong Country Tropical Freeze, SMBW plays more loosely with the Mario tropes to make each level more distinct. SMBW is constantly introducing different concepts and enemies to build a level around rather than maximizing the scenarios to place familiar foes and obstacles in (but many iconic enemies do make an appearance).

The power-up set in SMBW has a lot of new abilities in it, and surprisingly none that have to do with flying or gliding, functions that appear to have been integrated in some way into the badges instead. Although the badges weren't a favorite addition for a more experienced player like me, it was nice that they provided some special challenge levels for them. One of the main attractions of course was the Wonder Flowers and just the general _goofiness_ that makes the game stand out. Arguably a lot of the Wonder Flowers are just cheap visual tricks, and maybe SMBW isn't the most "platformy" Mario has gotten, but in such a well-worn series it was a welcome approach to have the surprises that break the rules a bit (a particular example being when the Wonder Flower turns movement into top-down style).

For me, the surprising standout in SMBW is the Dark Souls-style online play, which I thought would be a lame, tacked-on feature. It does make the game significantly easier, but I think it was already easy enough that its benefits are a good tradeoff. Not only is it cool in general to see others playing at the same time as you, but it gave me a little rush of excitement to leave hints to secrets for someone or save them from death (or have them do the same for me). I do hope the game maintains enough of a player base for late-comers to be able to enjoy this. I also hope for some kind of challenge mode update, but it was still a blast to play, even if on the easy side.

## Retro Roundup

AKA the unofficial Nintendo Switch Online section, although not all of these came from there. I didn't consider these part of my "planned" backlog, but gave them each at least a little bit of time.

### Kuru Kuru Kururin

This game, whose name I do not enjoy writing, but also has an unfortunate initialism, is a puzzle maze game where you navigate a (slowly-spinning) helicopter from a top down perspective. The core idea is that you can only pass certain areas while your blades are at a certain angle. I thought it was pretty novel, and fairly addicting at first, but quickly grew bored of the harder stages as it felt like it was more about control precision than puzzle solving.

### WarioWare Inc: Mega Microgame$

I have a weird nostalgia for this game, as I'd play it at the kiosks in Walmart and Target back in the day, though never owning it myself. In 2023, it's a reminder of how different portable gaming used to be, and how lucky we are now. Although the GBA era did see an increase in full-fledged gaming experiences that could rival consoles, WW is a relic of the time when portable games were designed for 5-minute sessions. Playing through it more like a console game, it was easy to see how short and simple it really is. A lot of the microgames also feel a bit trial and error. But nonetheless, there is an undeniable charm here.

### Super Mario Advance 4: Super Mario Bros. 3

The title is bad, but the game is good. This is one I've played a million times in the past, including the GBA form, but mostly the NES one. I didn't actually play the main game, but there is one cool addition here: eReader levels. I was later surprised to learn that the eReader was considered pretty obscure, as even I (with a very limited gaming budget as a kid) owned one. I had a few of the level cards too, but I believe they were sold like trading cards, so it was of course impossible to get them all. 

Having them all available is awesome, and there's nothing wrong with any of the ones I played, but I didn't get around to doing them all. Nowadays, Mario Maker is a much better option for getting more 2D Mario action, although this is sort of like a distant precursor to MM, in that some levels mash together elements from different 2D Mario games.

### Turok: Dinosaur Hunter

I bought this port on a sale on Switch years ago for reasons I'll never know. The main thing I remember was my mom rented this for me on N64 one time when I was home sick from school, and school sick days playing video games were always awesome. So I finally gave this one a proper shot this and aside from the big world being confusing, it just wasn't all that fun to play. After quickly abandoning this it was a good reminder that the whole point of chasing nostalgia is sticking with your most familiar favorites, not trying to find something new in the old.

### Nintendo DS

This is a console, but gets a mention here because I was so excited to find it for $15 at Goodwill, with games included. I later found out the games were worth less than I thought, but it was still a steal overall, and the kind of deal so seldom found at thrift stores anymore.

Most of the games in there weren't major ones, but it did include Mario Kart DS and New Super Mario Bros. MKDS was interesting for a bit, mostly because of the little challenges, which I recall is sadly not a concept they kept around by MK8. I played a world of NSMB but not any further since I've already played it through before.

Then there's Picross DS, which I had to buy separately, but was the perfect length (only doing up to 10x10s) for some diversions on a flight. For some reason I enjoyed playing a simpler console even though I could have easily played my Switch. That's about the extent of my DS experimentation, but it rekindled an interest in possibly revisiting more of this console in the future.

### Castlevania: The Adventure

I knew this game was pretty maligned, but it was part of the Castlevania Anniversary Collection, and figured it's short enough to check out. Many of its shortcomings are common to other games of the era, sometimes even good ones: unfair enemy placements, ridiculously tight jumps, screen flickering, stingy checkpoints, etc. However, the fact that it has _all_ of these flaws, plus some more severe ones, means it is not one of the good ones. The NES Castlevania games pushed the limit of how stiffly a game could control and be good, and CTA goes beyond the breaking point there. 

The overall control is the worst part of the game, but things like losing your whip upgrades on any hit are also annoying. Honestly I kind of see what they are going for, as a lot of the challenge hinges on keeping your whip, much in the same way it's key to preserve your subweapons in other games. But not having subweapons already constrains you a lot to begin with, and sucks out a lot of the variety. The platforming is actually decent at times, and at least deviates from the NES entries, but gets annoying with some of the tight jumps, or climbing up a rope to the next screen and having enemies thrust at you without warning. Many sections feel extremely long and sluggish. The visuals are obviously much more limited technically, but it's severely lacking in the striking imagery that makes Castlevania great.

I persevered through this only due to heavy use of save states. I did pretty well on the first couple stages, but by the end I was saving after every encounter, just ready to see the extent of what the game had to offer, then probably never touch it again.

### Castlevania II: Belmont's Revenge

It's Castlevania Mega Man! Not just in the stage select screen, but the more vertical oriented gameplay, with the new ability to whip from a chain (or rope, whatever) very reminiscent of Mega Man shooting off ladders. Other than that this game is mostly a refined version of Castlevania: The Adventure. I'd say the level design, in a vacuum, is only marginally better, though it has some interesting concepts. But its across the board improvements show that CTA was hiding a decent game somewhere, and also demonstrate how getting the fundamentals right can make a world of difference in perception. Belmont's Revenge is simply much more enjoyable to play, with far better controls, fuller music, fewer cheap traps, more checkpoints, and the return of subweapons (albeit, disappointingly, only two types). Of course six stages is also better than four, though it is also a quite short game.

Unfortunately, it is also Mega Man-esque in the design of the final boss, which was far too hard for me to go on with. It was the kind of thing that wasn't even fun to try figuring out with save states. The penultimate boss was also a handful, and the first time I used save states. Up until that point, it might be the easiest Classicvania I've played, perhaps an overcorrection from CTA. Overall, a solid throw-in for the Anniversary Collection, of which I'd already played most of its main draws separately.

### Kirby and the Amazing Mirror

I'm not the biggest Kirby fan, but when I heard this was a Kirby Metroidvania I thought it would be a good use of the formula. I enjoyed The Great Cave Offensive for putting more emphasis on exploration, given Kirby's easy nature can be boring for straightforward linear platforming. Unfortunately Amazing Mirror disappoints as only a loose adherent to the genre. Backtracking is expected, but in this you constantly have to re-enter the same doors from the hub world and repeat parts of the level from the starting point. A lot of places I could go seemed to have no real purpose in progression, and then they kick you back to the hub world where you have to start from a door again. Instead of having permanent upgrades, you need to carry through certain copy abilities to pass some obstacles, though I didn't play long enough to see if said obstacles were mandatory. What sounded like one of the most interesting Kirby games on paper sadly turned out to be one of the most unappealing to play of all.

### Wario Land 3

A few years ago, I'm pretty sure I played the first two Wario Land games, but have close to zero recollection of them. That might be a good thing, because my general expectations for a Game Boy game are to be breezy and innocuous. Unfortunately, WL3 is not very breezy and full of tedium. To its credit, it's hard to think of another 2D platformer that plays quite like it, and the idea of making Wario take abuse to progress is funny. Instead of having a timer or lives to deal with, you go around exploring levels for keys and treasure chests that serve as a level goal, with four pairs of them appearing in each level. Over time you have to revisit levels with new abilities to unlock the later chests.

It sounds like a good idea in principle, but I was quickly starting to see that keeping of track of which levels you can revisit would be difficult. There's a lot of replaying the same sections as a result of having to go back, but also because levels are littered with enemies and traps that send you backwards on each obstacle. Some of the platforming concepts are pretty novel, but it's just not fun enough to outweigh the more annoying aspects. The visual design and music also sadly fail to elevate the experience enough to be worth pushing through (although that's a pretty common case with the heavily limited Game Boy).

### Castlevania Legends

It's a sheer coincidence that I played the first two Castlevania GB games this year, as it was before Legends was announced as a Switch online addition. Actually, until that point I didn't even know this game existed at all! It's easy to see why, as it's a late 90s game that plays more like one from the late 80s.

This game is pretty easy in some ways, but also full of some of frustrations you'd hope not to see anymore, like unfair enemy placement and bad collision detection. The lack of traditional subweapons is disappointing, and instead they appear as additional collectible items that had no purpose to my knowledge. You do unlock special subweapons after beating each stage, and can permanently select between them, which is a nice idea to introduce to the series, but most of them aren't that useful in combat or take too many hearts. I found myself save stating gratuitously to hold on to my hearts. Even if the game is known to be a little easier, I just didn't feel like dealing with any repetition. It's already repetitive enough in its overlong, meandering levels, which is really the main flaw; yet ultimately it's still a short game.

The most annoying levels had a lot of vertical action, which is where I really missed weapons like the axe. You eventually get a subweapon that can damage all enemies on screen from anywhere, but at 5 hearts a pop it's much costlier than the axe. You also get this ability that supercharges you for a short period of time, which makes most of the boss fights easy if you hold on to it until then. Really this game is just all about holding on to your abilities for the opportune moments, and dying significantly alters how easy that is - not particularly different from any Classicvania, really. It might get a slightly unfair rap, but having brought very little to the table after Belmont's Revenge (and some regressions), it's better left forgotten.

## Game Pass 

I got a three month trial to Game Pass, so in spite of my distaste for subscriptions, I decided I might as well make use of it. I also decided that I'd be a little more loose with what I play, so I ended up not loving a lot of these, but it can be nice to experiment a bit.

### A Short Hike

This fittingly named game is short, and it's about hiking up a mountain. In order to get up to the mountain, you need golden feathers, which can be obtained through a combination of exploration and completing _very clearly_ Animal Crossing-inspired tasks. The mechanics for gliding around are pretty decent, but it's light on actually testing you. This is at its heart a "cozy game" that hides its lack of substance behind a cheerful demeanor. It's Animal Crossing without the Nintendo polish or sharp dialogue or the ongoing sense of progression that makes it worthwhile. I suppose there are plenty of worse ways to spend your time, but this is one I'll file away as a brief "time-killer" game.

### Cocoon

Another brief one, Cocoon takes you through some interesting but ultimately forgettable landscapes with ambient electronic music in the background. The central gimmick is solving puzzles with orbs, each of which is both an ability and a world itself. In theory, the idea of hopping between these worlds is neat, but the concept doesn't get explored too in depth. In striking a delicate balance towards playability, the puzzles are naturally pretty easy, as the process of elimination keeps your options narrow. That's not to say I was brute forcing my way through, nor was everything immediately obvious, but I didn't feel like my understanding of these embedded worlds and their relationship with each other was truly tested. 

### Dead Cells

I never could get into the roguelike genre, but I did enjoy Hades - and maybe it's not fair to compare everything to it, but it did come to mind playing Dead Cells. Being a roguelite, DC at least did have a sense of meta-progression, but it's buried in a lot of repetition and tedium. The same is true of Hades, frankly, but a key difference in that is how the story and dialogue promise you more of a motivation for pushing forwards. In DC, you are a fairly nondescript shadow guy, and you do things because your video game senses tell you to, but there wasn't much going on with the story in the (admittedly limited) amount I played. The biggest effect it had on me was making me want to play Castlevania.

Ultimately I remain unsold on roguelikes because some of the same downsides I've seen before are here too. The gameplay _can_ be fun when you hit the right combinations, but it's a bit of a needle in a haystack, and once you do get something you like it can just as easily be taken away from you. You're constantly teased on areas you can go and things you can do but the game is vague about when/where/how you will reach that point. It seems more suited to someone who can play a little bit of the same game every day, which I generally am not, but I'm not ruling out picking it back up later on in my trial period.

### Tunic

Tunic is a game that could easily have been a mediocre Zelda clone with some Dark Souls elements. It adheres only very loosely to the Zelda formula of having dungeons packed with items that are used to solve puzzles and open new areas of the world, which was a bit disappointing. But what sets it apart, and got me so engrossed initially, is how it revolves around collecting pieces of the in-game manual to gradually understand how to progress. This manual is, to be clear, not a sleek modern UI with tutorialized descriptions, but a virtual instruction book stylized like an NES manual. The manual is a pretty novel concept, but more broadly, Tunic is interesting for something that isn't necessarily difficult to do but modern games are too afraid of: it demands you to figure things out on your own. I didn't always enjoy this, but I think I'd rather have a game be a little too confusing than too permissive, especially a lower-budget one that doesn't rely on spectacle (though for what it's worth, I enjoyed a lot of the isometric visuals).

At least, that is how I felt for the first half of the game, when I was loving it. Then in the second half, it makes an unexpected pivot into a much worse game. The atmosphere becomes more dreary, a lot of the enemies disappear and those that remain are a big difficulty spike; but most of all, it becomes way too puzzle-y. But it isn't puzzle-y in the fun Zelda way, nor like its own first half where you have more unexplored areas to find your way to. Instead it's like the second half of Fez, with varying degrees of esoteric environmental riddles. Many of them aren't necessarily _difficult_ to solve, but overly complicated in ways that don't particularly take advantage of the medium of video games vs., say, having them in a puzzle book. At least you can beat the game without them, but you get an anti-climactic bad ending - but for me, that still beat the tedium of working through riddles to get the good ending.

### Limbo

Another short game, and one that has a design connection to Cocoon, sure, why not? Even though I didn't love Cocoon, yeah, I played this. I didn't even love Inside when I played it years ago, and it's easy to see how this is like a proto-Inside. But that greater simplicity might not be a bad thing. Limbo is very compact, and the puzzles generally short on frustration (even if they are also pretty short on novelty). The later game did have some fun moments for me, when it becomes a little bit more platformer-y and less puzzle-y. The minimalist black and white art is an effective and unique aesthetic. While I can't see much reason to revisit this one, it was a solid example of how indie games can challenge the medium.

### New Super Lucky's Tale

(New) Super Lucky's Tale is one of those games I'd always see in bargain sections and digital sales and think how it looked like those knockoff "mascot platformers" you'd see so often in the 90s. But I'm a sucker for 3D platformers, and it gets okay reviews, so it's the perfect candidate for a Game Pass look.

After making it only a little into the second world, I'm unclear who the audience is for this - one might think for people who were fans of similar games when they were kids, but it's so basic and easy it might as well be for _current_ children. Only problem is if you couldn't get your child into something better like Mario, why would they play this? It's the kind of game a clueless cheap parent might get cause they think it's basically the same thing as Mario. It's a "knockoff" in that sense, but the gameplay itself is more uninspired than it is overly derivative.

The level that did me in had me rounding up chickens and eggs, which were hiding in plain sight approximately 10 feet away. I gave a few more levels a try after that, but only with the faintest of hopes that something interesting would come up to restore my faith. That kind of menial task wasn't uncommon in beloved platformers like Banjo-Kazooie, but a 2010s product should show more, and NSLT is also lacking in the kind of general creativity that makes such a thing tolerable. The visuals are half-assed, characters are very cliche and generic, and there just isn't that killer design factor that great games possess. NSLT is not technically a bad game, but it's the laziest kind of competent game-making.

### Ninja Gaiden Sigma 2

I always loved the first of the hack and slash Ninja Gaiden games, but when I couldn't afford an Xbox 360 for a long time, I missed out on the follow ups. Now that I've finally played one, it turns out I wasn't missing much. This one cranks up the male fantasy, with more gore and more comically large breasted female characters, but (at least in the four chapters I played) there wasn't much more to the coolest and least embarrassing part: your crazy ninja moves. In fact, for a remaster of an Xbox 360 game, it feels straight up like the same engine, which is good for my muscle memory, but not so good otherwise.

I'm not sure what can be attributed to the Sigma update specifically, but the biggest changes from NG1 to NG2 are a lot of streamlined parts. You get new weapons much more frequently and the options for techniques and upgrades are simplified. Much of your health regenerates after battle, and the number of healing items you can carry is reduced. The purpose and barriers to entry for the shop are reduced with these changes. Further, arrows are now unlimited. These changes can be handy, but I'm not sure it makes for a better game; together, they all made me feel like both combat and exploration were lower stakes.

I thought the boss fights I encountered were all pretty terrible, but it's certainly possible NG1 wasn't much better in that department. Other things that I would've liked to have seen improved just weren't, like the way the camera angle can change mid battle because of how levels are "segmented" with preferred automatic angles. And in the era of Soulslikes, going back to a game without targeting or invincibility frames on dodges can be a little tough. Again this is a problem in the first as well, but if I would go back to one, it would be the one I'm familiar with. NG2 also feels familiar, but far too much so for a next-generation sequel.

### Celeste

Celeste is one of those acclaimed games I didn't really have on my radar, mainly due to the vague resemblance to Super Meat Boy, a game which I just could not get into. But that makes Celeste a perfect Game Pass candidate, and it has a lot going on that I liked. Of course, the key to all of it is the platforming, and even though none of its core individual elements of climbing, wall jumping or mid-air dashing are particularly novel, they are brought together in a borderline revolutionary way. I mostly focused on the main path of the game, yet that alone gets an impressive amount of mileage out of these mechanics (of course, there are a lot of context-specific abilities that show up throughout the game as well).

The platforming is fun, but the earnestly personal story and the environments that showed pixelated graphics still have something to give are what kept pushing me forward. And yet, by the end of Celeste I felt a bit like it's just a collection of highly challenging platforming screens, even if the levels are more continuous than SMB. And these aren't _flaws_ with either per se, but I'm not sure it's what I'm looking for in a platforming game. I prefer longer levels with more exploration (not to say Celeste lacks in exploration), but that can often clash with high difficulty since punishing death can be alienating. So as the difficulty gets cranked up in a platformer, the breakdown of the challenges tends to get smaller, which can make them feel both insignificant and repetitive. This type of game wears out my d-pad thumb as well, though for what it's worth, Celeste does a solid job of making the main content manageable (for patient platforming vets at least) and cranking up the difficulty appropriately for the optional stuff.

### Hi-Fi Rush

Admittedly this might be the game in this group that got the least play of all out of me, but I quickly grew bored of it. This is one I checked out on pure hype, as it looked like something resembling Jet Set Radio (or at least my distant conception of JSR), which is out of my wheelhouse. It is evidently a bit more unique, a rhythm game combined with a sort of 3D beat em up, but the cartoony visuals and punky character attitudes still made it feel a bit like it was out of another time. I had a lot of the same feelings playing this as I did when trying out Cadence of Hyrule, which is that I prefer my rhythm games cut and dry, just hitting buttons in time with the prompt. That's a fancy way of saying, I suck at doing the rhythm when it's a little more implicit, not to mention mixed with other gameplay elements. HFR does advertise that it's not meant to be difficult if you miss on the beats, but without that, there doesn't seem much point to me.