# 2024 Gaming Year in Review

2024 is another year with a few new games that interested me, but mostly spent on my backlog as usual. This year I reached _way_ back, getting back into retro gaming. Sort of. I bought a CRT again, bought one of those retro handhelds that are dozens of now (and quickly resold it after not being satisfied), and experimented with several other emulation setups. 

Turns out, the _concept_ of retro games and the technology to play them is often more appealing than actually playing them. I did my share of trying games out, but I'm mostly going to document those in separate pages unless a particularly interesting one is worth highlighting. One thing I took an interest in is hacking and homebrews, although I've barely scratched the surface with that. I _did_ spend a lot of time making a ROMhack myself, but it will probably be years before it's done (if ever).

This is also a year I downsized my collection a bit through eBay sales, not so much for the money or physical space, but the mental space. Sometimes, you've gotta let go of games you probably won't play anymore. Although in the era of remasters, not to mention emulation again, there are many games that are never truly gone. 

## Jump to Review

### Main Reviews

[Mario and Luigi: Superstar Saga](#mario-and-luigi-superstar-saga)  
[Final Fantasy VII Rebirth](#final-fantasy-vii-rebirth)  
[New Super Luigi U](#new-super-luigi-u)  
[Titanfall 2](#titanfall-2)  
[Dark Souls 2: Scholar of the First Sin](#dark-souls-2-scholar-of-the-first-sin)  
[Bucky O'Hare](#bucky-ohare)  
[Outer Wilds](#outer-wilds)  
[Super Mario 3D World](#super-mario-3d-world)  
[Castlevania: Bloodlines](#castlevania-bloodlines)  
[Half-Life](#half-life)  
[Bowser's Fury](#bowsers-fury)  
[Halo 2](#halo-2)  
[Donkey Kong Country: Tropical Freeze](#donkey-kong-country-tropical-freeze)  
[NieR: Replicant ver.1.22474487139...](#nier-replicant-ver122474487139)  
[Castlevania: Dawn of Sorrow](#castlevania-dawn-of-sorrow)  
[Dead Space 2](#dead-space-2)  
[The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds](#the-legend-of-zelda-a-link-between-worlds)  
[Halo 3](#halo-3)  
[Castlevania: Portrait of Ruin](#castlevania-portrait-of-ruin)  

### Mini Reviews

[Mario Kart 8 Booster Course DLC](#mario-kart-8-booster-course-dlc)  
[Shovel Knight](#shovel-knight)  
[Super Mario Maker 1 & 2](#super-mario-maker-1--2)  
[From Below (NES Homebrew)](#from-below-nes-homebrew)
[Haunted Castle (Revisted)](#haunted-castle-revisted)  
[Bloodborne](#bloodborne)  
[Tetris DS](#tetris-ds)  
[Donkey Kong (1994)](#donkey-kong-1994)  

## Main Reviews

### Mario and Luigi: Superstar Saga

I got through about half of this game until I ran up on the release of the next one on this list, and by the time I could've gone back to it, I decided there wasn't much need to continue. This is the kind of game I played more for the sake of being able to say I played it, which is what I've been trying to do less of this year. I am a medium-sized fan of both Paper Mario and Super Mario RPG, so I thought it would be good to see what the third style of Mario RPG was like, and I did get a decent enough idea of it in the limited time.

It was interesting to learn that developer AlphaDream was formed in part with ex-Square developers, and it shows in ways that I don't know how to explain. At first I was basking in the Square/SNES-like nostalgia, but it wasn't enough to carry a game that can get boring. I'm not sure if it really does anything worse than the other light-hearted Mario RPG games, but my tolerance for them might be lower now. M&L leans even more into the timed action concept than its counterparts, which I would've figured is a logical to place to take them, but I'm not so sure after playing it. The badges felt even more simple, and the timed actions make (almost?) any battle possible to do without taking damage. That's not to say getting a perfect battle is easy, as the most challenging and interesting thing about the game is the simultanoues character control, but overall it's clearly meant to be a lighter game. The first Paper Mario's battle system already felt more untraditional in comparison to SMRPG, but M&L takes it even further. And with a silly but low-stakes story, as to be expected, this one is another game that's perfectly fine but not essential.

### Final Fantasy VII Rebirth

Final Fantasy VII Rebirth is a game that I had pretty clear expectations for, in that it would probably have the things I liked about FF7 Remake but also some things that I disliked. And my expectations were pretty much correct, so a lot of my sentiment towards Rebirth can be summed up with my Remake review (Top 100 Games for 2020). But just because it had a lot of those same things in place doesn't mean there wasn't a lot added.

Early on, I almost rolled my eyes seeing yellow paint climb holds, tower-climbing, quest-filled open maps and item crafting, gameplay elements that were already outdated in the 2020 predecessor that managed to avoid them. But perhaps "outdated" is a bit unfair - they are a bit cliche in AAA, but serve their purpose. Rebirth doesn't break the mold as an open world game, and arguably isn't even _that_ open world with the way it's sectioned off, but that can also strengthen it by making the sometimes checklist-y quest items managed by region. I did enjoy exploring on Chocobo even if it's just another take on a horse, but they gave them a few special abilities that were nice. 

Just like Remake, it does lean heavily on the strength of the source material, but it does avoid the very possible trap of screwing it up. There are certain times maybe it can lack in subtlety compared to the original, plus some confusing stuff, but it makes up for it with mostly good added and expanded material. 

Rebirth isn't all that revolutionary in general, but it might be a potential all-timer just for all the things it throws at you. A lot of big budget games lately either find the one thing they're good at and stick with it, or they're open world games that repeat various shallow content all over. Rebirth obviously is closer to the latter, but it's far from the worst example of tedious open world tasks, as the story payoff can often be good worldbuilding, and a lot of it is close enough to the main path. But aside from the usual open world elements, Rebirth has a lot more, and it feels like a throwback with all the minigames honoring the original's legacy. With one exception (Queen's Blood, and _maybe_ Chocobo racing), the minigames are all fun but not great, the kind of thing you'd play just for the main game objectives but not get wrapped up in otherwise. Yet I'm not sure I'd have it any other way, as it makes them just minor distractions in the game that don't demand too much of your time when you see one, though collectively add up in the experience.

Rebirth is full of silly elements aside from the minigames, and that's the charm of it. It knows when to be serious, and the themes are ever resonant. But it's not the kind of game that is so self-serious it is afraid to have too much fun at its own expense. Sometimes Rebirth moments can be a little corny, campy or gratuitous, but only within the context of themselves; they don't spoil any of the bigger picture, and it's hard to even imagine it at all without them.

### New Super Luigi U

After playing Super Mario Bros. Wonder last year, I wanted to go back to New Super Mario Bros. and see if I was being unfair with it. This is my compromise on doing so, as I never played the Luigi levels, so it let me experience something a little new too. And to be fair, there are some pretty creative levels, but it takes a few worlds to get going. SMBW would hit you with unique things right off the bat, but NSLU does a lot of easing into the familiar world of Mario with lots of early levels that feel "tile designed" in their simplicity. And even once the more creative levels hit, they just aren't as common or as memorable as SMBW.

A gripe I have with NSLU in particular is that, although the levels are shortened to 100 seconds, most of them do feel like scaled down regular Mario levels. They aren't as expansive, but they still have you exploring and stopping to think about star coins to some degree. The time limit is more there to make you _feel_ rushed than an actual challenge to overcome. Given the short time limit I would've liked to see more levels that focus on speed and timing jumps to keep your momementum, but there were very few. Additionally, Luigi's unique mechanics are rarely, if ever, tested outside of optional objectives in a level; I would've liked to see some sections where you realize you have to make an extra high or long jump to proceed. 

The short pace of the levels also means you don't get a lot of time to really master their gimmicks, or remember them for long after. The base NSMBU is likely a little better, though also largely forgettable. These are the kind of games I don't mind having played once, but I'd rather just replay Super Mario 3 or World if I'm in the mood for 2D Mario. And now, for a modern take, SMBW gives us a much better looking and diverse take on it. There are very faint glimpses of that in NSLU, but it's mostly an okay additional set of challenges for NSMBU that is afraid to fully break free from its base game's conventions.

### Titanfall 2

Titanfall 2 isn't the most popular game around, but one that I've only ever heard really good things, and I can see why. I don't know if I'm quite ready to call it one of the best FPS campaigns of all time, but the question did go through my mind as I was playing it. Granted, FPS campaigns are not one of my strongest suits anyway, but regardless, TF2 was a remarkably fun game to play. 

Obviously a key part of it is the mechanics, and undoubetdly zipping around on walls and doing double jumps is a ton of fun, especially for a genre that can be awkward for platforming. Getting into the mech is also of course a highlight, but at its core TF2 also has some snappy and satisfying control for the ordinary shooting sections. TF2's story feels almost more like a little vignette, but what it excels at is being interesting without getting in the game's way. 

In general, TF2 isn't bogged down with much. I was impressed to play something that is so "all killer, no filler", but it does it in a breezy five or six hours. At such a small amount of time, it definitely started fading from my mind pretty fast. It impresses, and does so without waste, but not for long. But it may be a game worth revisiting later at a higher difficulty level.

### Dark Souls 2: Scholar of the First Sin

After playing Dark Souls 2, it's not hard to see why it's considered a black sheep in the series. There is a lot of stuff that's still good here, but something about the experience just feels off. At the start I quickly noticed things that recalled a regression back to Demon's Souls: having a central area to level up, consumable healing items at the start, and losing some of your max health upon death. You eventually build up your flasks, and you don't lose _much_ health each time (and it's easier to restore), so it's not as annoying as Demon's, but it just doesn't make sense to go back to things that were happily absent in Dark Souls 1. The central leveling is a blessing and a curse, because you get bonfire fast travel very early, but you lose that sense of traversal and connectedness in the world.

I defeated the first boss of the game without taking damage, which is an appropriate tone-setter. I think I defeated more bosses in DS2 on my first blind run than I might have in all the other Soulslikes I've played combined. Is it an easier game than usual, or did I just stumble upon a broken build? Coming off Elden Ring as my last played, one thing that's for sure is the boss move sets are so much simpler, but that would probably be the case if I were to go back to DS1 as well. I definitely think something is off here though. For instance, there's a lack of "miniboss" enemies. Instead DS2 tends to opt for trying to take you down with gangs of small enemies, which is more annoying and less fun than outduelling a single powerful one.

There are some interesting experimental touches to DS2. In particular, the petrified journeyers and the Pharros contraptions show interesting potential, but they are undermined by being tied to rare consumable items. The more boring but fleshed-out mechanic is the torch, which is a much simpler management of resources since it can be a loot drop. One of the highlights of DS2 for me was a boss where you can light the arena ahead of time to give you an advantage. Most of the time the torch "puzzle" sections are an adequate little addition to the series, but I definitely sensed an over-reliance on it by the end.

Above all else, DS2 is just lacking in compelling areas to traverse through. I will say it is about on par with other entries in terms of how things are laid out to make you think about obtaining loot in the distance, exploring from a different angle, etc. The problem is that it doesn't linger on most of its areas long. DS1 had so many places I remember, sometimes from being stuck trying to get through, but memorable nonetheless. Everyone knowss Anor Londo, Sen's Fortress and Blighttown, and that's just a few. DS2 has maybe two or three areas of that scope TOTAL, but it's mostly a jump between small 1-2 bonfire-sized zones.

What does DS2 do right? Not get in its own way with regards to having the basics down. I'm pretty sure there are also a few, _little_ quality of life improvements over DS1. But in the bigger picture, like the enemies, bosses and levels, it's hard not to say it's a downgrade across the board. It's a classic good game in a great series, the kind of thing you'd recommend if only it weren't attached to a name where there are plenty of better ones to choose from.

### Bucky O'Hare

 Bucky O'Hare is the game I got started learning to ROMhack with, so naturally I needed to play it. It's also a game that appears on my top 100, more as a sentimental favorite. I don't mean that like it isn't a good game, although after replaying it, I could definitely see even more flaws than before. To be fair, a lot of those flaws are in comparison to Mega Man, but I realized just how much better MM is beyond the more superificial reasons in my top 100 entry.

 I'd say that fundamentally BOH is just too easy, but I have read and watched people online say it's a hard game. I can get easily over 30 extra lives in this game... so okay, maybe experience plays a factor in that, but why even let me get that many in the first place? That's the main issue with BOH's difficulty, it's overly forgiving. I think when people say that it's hard they mean it has some tough platforming screens, and a good amount of those have instant deaths. But outside of that, it's almost laughable.

 The levels don't have intermittent checkpoints like MM, instead opting to let you retry on _every_ screen, even after one of its barely-punishing game overs. Enemy placement is pretty predictable and not overly cumbersome, but it's especially hindered by their general weakness. Outside of a minority of the bosses, I'd say nearly every enemy doesn't do enough damage or have enough HP. It's the kind of game where most of my deaths are in a pit or spikes, but having HP whittled down is very rare compared to MM.

 Another weird thing I noticed is that levels might have a sequence of three to four screens that use the same platforming gimmick, but their difficulties are all mixed up instead of steadily progressing. It's not the worst thing, but it does come across as sloppy. 

 One thing I'll give credit to BOH for over MM is that I switched between the different characters more than I tend to switch abilities in MM, but that's more because I think MM doesn't do a great job making most of them obviously appealing. Even in BOH, out of the five characters there are only two I get much use out of; one is mostly just for boss fights and the other two only have a handful of useful screens each. The character abilities are less creative than MM powers, but they are intuitive in their usefulness; switching between characters is very snappy, and there's no guesswork about enemy weaknesses or energy cost to experimenting. This is definitely the most interesting thing BOH had going for it, but I wish it was explored more.

### Outer Wilds

I honestly had no clue what Outer Wilds was (maybe some kind of camping surival game), but bought the game pretty much on acclaim alone. Turns out it's a space faring adventure game, but "adventure" can have a lot of connotations, and in this case, it's more like an adventure game in the classical sense. That is to say, it's a virtual scavenger hunt of sorts, and just like its 80s and 90s counterparts, it has its fair share of overly obscure clues and sequences.

To be clear, this is a distant relative of such games, taking place in a 3D world with detailed physics, and a time loop concept that adds a layer of challenge - or, in many cases, annoyance. The most interesting aspects of OW are the platforming and spaceflight, but it's so crammed with little challenges due to its microscopic 22-minute loop length that you don't get much time at once to play around with them. It's a game that dares you not to make a mistake navigating or else you might be screwed over for that loop. The satisfaction doesn't come so much from mastering one navigation scenario, but learning to control yourself better enough over time that you are more prepared for the next one. The unfolding narrative is a little like that as well, with those aha moments where things you encountered earlier start to come together.

But it's hard for me to say that things are particularly fun _in the moment_ with OW. The number of annoyances is too high, and there are so many Whys. Why does the intel sometimes not point to the thing it's a hint for? Why is there no suicide button from the start? Why can't I see exact time or advance it more easily? Why can't I save more specific points of interest? I struggle to think of a downside to adding things like this, except one: They would further make the game's underlying simplicity evident. Although perhaps a little ambiguity is defensible, it sometimes makes for annoying repetition, for example: reaching an area where you have to go far from your ship, you might miss some of the intel and not realize it since you can't check outside the ship, then have to come back again on another loop.

I've never been a big fan of adventure games, clearly. Maybe OW is among the better ones, but I'm not the person to say. To its credit, the actual act of moving your character is generally fun (context of the game's progression system aside), and something that wouldn't have been attainable a long time ago. But even as decades have passed, it leaves me feeling like at the core of the adventure genre are still boring games trying to hide that they're boring.

### Super Mario 3D World

Even when I first played 3D World when it was relatively new, I feel like there was this sense that this wasn't really the next big leap for Mario. Obviously that turned out to be true, and I sure am thankful we eventually got Super Mario Odyssey instead. In the post-Odyssey world, I had little urge to come back to this, but when I had the opportunity to get the Switch version on the cheap (mostly for Bowser's Fury) I thought why the hell not.

But this isn't intended to be a negative review. 3DW is a fitting game to represent the Wii U, this thing that has a sort of underlying brilliance with no fanfare. I don't say that in the sense that it's an unknown game (by Wii U standards), but when you (again) comapre it to the more "adventure-y" style of 3D Mario games, the game itself doesn't really make a point of popping out at you or emphasizing big moments. It's just a humble collection of levels - very good ones. Experience a few minutes of some of the most creative 3D platforming around, then repeat. There are of course the fun little Mario world map things, and the boss levels have a bit more "cinema", but that's more or less it.

The stakes don't feel super high but that's sort of the beauty of it. Sometimes you just want to get straight to the point, and 3DW is pretty much all action. While these types of game maybe lack in the "total package" aspect that separates the all-timers, I'll always have a place in my heart for them.

### Castlevania: Bloodlines

Castlevania: Bloodlines is another minor game overall, but a big gaming bucket list item for me, finally finishing off all the (major) "Classicvania" titles. Although I enjoy them, at this point in my life I played through it on the easiest possible setting with the easiest character (Eric Lecarde) and liberal use of save states. The big gimmick with this one, I suppose, is that you have two characters that have moments where the paths split due to their unique abilities. I also did some of the John Morris path, but got a little bored of it, as the splits are not that large.

I was a little surprised to see that the SNES counterpart, Super Castlevania IV, is generally higher received, as there is plenty to like about Bloodlines. I briefly messed around in SCIV (part of the same Anniversary Collection) after playing this, and I can say in the very least that Bloodlines has a lot more visual clarity. It's possible that it's a lot shorter (instead relying on the second character playthrough to pad it out), but length is hard to gauge with save state use. I also appreciate in Bloodlines that it tends to give you subweapons more generously, and the addition of mini bosses is a nice touch. It has its fair share of cool visual tricks as well, like mirroring, a level where you circle around a tower and a level I could only describe as looking like you're refracted through different segments. The soundtrack is certainly on par with the rest of the series. I don't know if it's one of my favorites overall, but a solid addition.

### Half-Life

I don't know if Half-Life was as much of a bucket list item for me, but it was certainly a big gaming blind spot for such a legendary game. Having already played HL2, the gameplay of number 1 wasn't a big surprise, but it's very impressive given the context of its time. Back when FPS games were still called "Doom clones", HL ushered in a new era. In a few ways the leap from Wolfenstein and Doom to HL feels bigger than the leap from HL to FPS of today. HL has a degree of immersiveness that makes it feel downright modern, with its continuously unfolding levels, and impressive enemy AI that can do things like take cover behind objects and attempt to flush _you_ out of cover with grenades.

But many elements of HL are also a throwback. Even though the guns are animated in greater detail than a game like Doom, they don't have a lot of recoil or reactivity like in future FPS games, and combined with the generous auto-aim there is still some of that more "arcadey" feel to shooting. There is also a lot of platforming you don't really see much anymore, although at times it's the game's biggest flaw. I found the movement to be a little bit too fast (initially I tried to play this with a controller, but it's completely unplayable, and even still fast with a keyboard), considering the many instances you need to jump or walk along narrow ledge. 

HL also has a light amount of puzzle solving oriented around simple physics (box pushing) and activating switches across a series of locations. It was a nice throwback, but I am glad they got rid of the blue/yellow/red keycard trope. What really feels old about it is that you can get stuck at times and the game won't help you along, but it never took me too long to figure out the way forward, which is refreshing in contrast to today's hand-holding games. The last thing I should mention is that you can occasionally recruit security officers to help you out, which is a little but underwhelming, but another show of Valve's ambition to change the genre. If you can get over the sometimes overly sensitive movement and mildly confusing objectives, HL still holds up today - and even if you can't, it deserves respect as a forefather to the modern FPS.

### Bowser's Fury

My expectations for Bowser's Fury were some kind of proto-open-world 3D Mario, and that indeed is pretty much what it is. It's based around collecting items (this time, "cat shines") to progress like in the more popular 3D Mario games, but in a single world with different "levels" scattered around it. It is a pretty small world (the game took me five or six hours to fully complete), and BF is maybe a bit unrestrained in recycling level objectives, but the way things seamlessly unfold around you is a departure from past games. Nonetheless, I wonder if this is really a glimpse into the future or if it was both necessitated and enabled by the small map; it's hard to imagine something with the scope of Super Mario Odyssey coming together like this.

Obviously all Mario games have a baseline pretty high amount of wackiness, but entries like Odyssey and Sunshine have a degree of verisimilitude to the world that isn't present in BF. One the one hand, it is interesting and admirable that BF lifts almost all of its mechanics from 3D World to produce a companion game that simultaneously feels like its own thing. On the other hand, some of those mechanics are more at home in fixed camera (or 2D) Mario games, as in this setting it further highlights a sense of obstacle courses assembled out of fun gizmos rather than a real space. Arguably this doesn't or shouldn't matter, and it is true that it doesn't change that the platforming is excellent. I just think, like in my 3DW review, that it's the kind of thing that separates the upper echelon.

There are some entirely new Mario concepts here, mostly surrounding the fury system. I do like the change in level state that this brings about, though sometimes it is intrusive and inconvenient; maybe something like a day-night system could be an interesting take in a future entry. The biggest trick BF pulls out of its sleeve is the kaiju Bowser battles, and I did have fun with these, but it leans on them so early and often that by the end it's a little anticlimactic. Of course, there are the charming little flourishes, like how nearly _everything_ is a cat. We've been starved for a new 3D Mario for a while now, and while BF is a nice little appetizer, it doesn't rise above the relatively low expectations of something that was tacked on to a remaster.

### Halo 2

It had been so long since I played the Halo 2 campaign that going in, this felt more like a brand new playthrough, and yet once I started it was amazing how things like even incidental dialogue came rushing back to me. Twenty years after the hype, was the game as amazing as I remembered? Well, that will remain unanswered, as the multiplayer had always been a bigger draw for me. The campaign is still fun to experience because the core mechanics are very strong and hold up today, although it has its shortcomings. 

Most of my main complaints are things that carry over from the first game - checkpoints occasionally being wonky to trigger, similar looking sections of levels that make it easy to get turned around and mediocre squad gameplay. I think the overarching design framework is pretty similar between 1 and 2, although the story is arguably a bit more strained in 2. Halo 2 starts out very strong when the fight goes to earth early in the game, which is easily the part I remember most from back in the day. But as the game goes on it starts retreading on some concepts from the first game, with a bit of a ham-fisted Covenant civil war arc. It feels like it was designed with gameplay concepts first (new enemies, playable Elite - both not bad ideas) and then a need to squeeze a story around them second. I'm generally fine with that, as gameplay should be more important, though it's a little weird. Gameplay wise, the brutes themselves are an okay addition, but they are a bit too damage spongey.

The new weapons added to the game are a bit of a wash overall - some great, some bad, some mediocre, and of course an iconic (but in my opinion overrated) weapon taken away. There aren't a lot of big mechanical changes, though the Arbiter's cloaking ability is useful in a pinch, and little things like the new HUD, lack of health and fall damage, unlimited flashlight, etc. are all welcome changes. Sadly, it seems Halo 2's ambitions might have been dialed down a bit, but it came in on such strong foundations that even playing it safe makes for a great game.

### Donkey Kong Country: Tropical Freeze

I struggled a bit for what to write on this one. This is a game in my Top 100, but it wasn't the strongest entry, and when I played it again I liked it even less. As I was jotting down notes for the entry, I realized it'd be repeating a lot of what was already said, as well as comparing it too much to the SNES games, but it is a bit hard for me not to compare them.

I think there is just something _arduous_ about Tropical Freeze, which I'm not sure was present as much with Returns. This is probably best exemplified by the boss fights, which go on for several minutes with no checkpoints or replenished partner barrels. The normal levels are broken out with checkpoints, but still quite long nonetheless. There's a degree of overly demanding precision that sort of sucks the feeling of exploration out of them. Lots of levels are collapsing around you, leaving you hopping from platform to platform - it's a showcase for the game's cool visual ideas, which are its strength, but put that spectacle aside and it's all kind of repetitive and hurried. Even the water levels I played weren't super relaxed, and had this on a smaller scale with a string of sections demanding narrow timing windows.

By the time I got about midway through this, I decided I wasn't having that much fun. It still _feels_ like it should be a top 100 game, but maybe I just wasn't in the right mood this time. Once I hit that midpoint, I opened up my old save and went to the other rocket/minecart levels that I could easily identify. This might seem contradictory, as these levels are kind of the pinnacle of frantically blazing through and trying to nail your timing, but I think it's because in comparison to a "normal" level they don't have a pretense of being relaxed. Plus there are a lot of pseudo-3D sections in those levels, which might be the highlight of the game, although I had ironically forgotten they were in it, perhaps because there aren't a ton. Could that be the future of Donkey Kong? It's hard to say, as sadly we're at ten years now without even a word about a proper new DK. If Nintendo _is_ cooking something up, and it involves the decision to move away from sidescrolling, then perhaps the wait will be worth it.

### NieR: Replicant ver.1.22474487139...

NieR Replicant is a remaster from the early 2020s of a game from the early 2010s that feels like it belongs in the early 2000s. If you squint, you can see some similiarities to Zelda games of the time, but not in a flattering way. Like the worst Zelda impulses of the 2000s, the beginning of the game is a bit "tutorialized", with you having to go back and forth around your village, talking to helpful guide characters. But then it sets in that this goes on for the whole game. Of course eventually the trips back to the library become further apart, and you get out a bit more in the world, but it's a pretty small map that reuses locations a lot. I felt like it's sort of stuck never getting out of second gear (or at least not in the 20+ hours I lasted).

There are "dungeons" in the game, but they're not the most puzzle-y variety (some basic block pushing, grabbing keys, etc.). The game's combat is _okay_, but I didn't find a lot of actual change in feel between the numerous weapons, and the targeting/camera aren't great. There's some emphasis on combos, but the button inputs aren't as challenging as a true hack-n-slash game, so I just ended up mashing/holding the same button a lot. There are some sections that are a bit bullet hell-like, which would've been a potentially cool gimmick to lean further into.

Other outdated elements in Replicant include having discrete save points, which wouldn't be so bad if they weren't often near the middle/end of a dungeon rather than the beginning. There are lots of side-fetchquests as well, which also wouldn't be so bad if not for a high reliance on obtaining rare-ish loot drops. The quest tracking and maps are a little odd as well, but a more minor issue. But above all else, the story and characters just weren't compelling enough for me to push through all the flaws. It's in that era of games where the dialogue is still not great, but not bad enough to be amused by either. I also got a sense that the story was hiding something bigger from me, but I got tired of waiting for the payoff. 

### Castlevania: Dawn of Sorrow

I'm a big fan of Metroid-like games, and Castlevania is no exception, but good god after 5 games the Castlevania team really didn't learn a thing. I have the predecessor to this one, Aria of Sorrow, in my Top 100, though that's partly due to a weak 2003. For one thing, if I recall correctly, AoS is where there started being more RNG with the soul acquisition system. That carries over to DoS as well, but I found myself more annoyed this time, particularly when some randomly dropped souls were necessary to get the true ending. There's also a lot of bouncing around the map around the beginning of the game, because it's designed with a lot of arbitrary backtracking (moreso than the best examples of the genre).

I think the Castlevania games also have a particular tendency to back load it with a lot of bosses. Aside from being boring, this causes a difficulty spike since you get less intermittent leveling between bosses. This wasn't as noticeable in Symphony of the Night since it's easier, but with AoS the game goes from good difficulty to annoyingly hard. Not constant deaths per se, but the boss fights start feeling like you're underleveled. This mostly annoyed me at the final boss, which has a trivial 1st stage you'd have to replay if you died (but thankfully I had save states) followed by a really tough 2nd stage. 

Well I just talked more about my annoyances than the actual game, but what is there to say? The meat of it is standard Castlevania fare, even down to areas they tend to reuse (i.e. a chapel, an underground lake, clock tower) between games. Stuff like the souls system and how it's set up does flow nicely as a "subweapon", even if the RNG dependency on souls is annoying. The combat otherwise is pretty similar to past entries. Overall, still really fun with some annoying moments and lacking a bit in originality at this point.

### Dead Space 2

Dead Space 2 is sort of like my previous game on this list, a sequel to a game from my Top 100 that is horror-themed and largely does a lot of the same as its predecessor. But unlike Dawn of Sorrow, I had a more enjoyable time playing it and it did a little bit more to stand out from the previous game, so it gets an honorable mention in the top 100. Overall it's hard to really find a complaint with DS2 in comparison to the first game. The core gameplay isn't changed much, but there are new weapons and enemies. A lot of things are streamlined, like finding objectives. The zero gravity controls are one huge improvement over the original, a gameplay element I realize I didn't even mention in my DS1 review, but it's something that especially makes it stand out compared to Resident Evil 4. But even in this case, it's still used pretty sparingly, as this is primarily a shooting game.

The gunplay is generally more fun than the first in my opinion, although it faces stretches where it can get a little action-heavy, particularly as the game goes on. Also, even though the bosses in DS1 weren't amazing, it was odd how they seem to opt for a lack of traditional boss fights at all, aside pretty much from the end. So maybe it's not a complete improvement over the original, but in certain areas it's at worst a bit of a wash. Likewise, it was a welcome sight to see more environmental variety, although the setting and story of the first game were arguably a little bit tighter. I was worried about Isaac speaking in this one but in hindsight it was silly to be concerned. This is an _early_ 2010s game - not late 2010s, which is when (often inappropriately) quippy protagonists became common. I think the psychological horror setting fits for a silent protagonist conceptually about as well as any could, but giving Isaac dialogue was a net positive for me in the end, even if a small one. 

### The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds

The 3DS (maybe, still TBD) was one I thought would get caught up in my selling spree, so it was time to give this one another shot before possibly shipping it away. I played it many years ago when it was fairly new, and it was fine, but that's all. The fundamental gripe I have with A Link Between Worlds is that it's too much of a requel, playing like a dumbed-down version of A Link to the Past, and my opinion didn't really change on a revisit. You get a near 1:1 of the overworld from LttP in ALBW, but with some much less imaginative traversal since Lorule is sectioned apart and dotted with fixed transfer points. Most of the items are also ripped from LttP, but many are missing - which isn't _completely_ a bad thing, as LttP may have gone overboard with some of them. There is a degree of streamlining in ALBW that is kind of nice, but it's a fine line to walk that often dips into being overly simple.

Zelda games from around the early 00s to early 10s became kind of notorious for gating the player off and pointing them in a certain direction, so I get that the concept of doing the dungeons in any order was appealing. But when the items are all available from the start, and the limited 2D world is rather small, the idea of having free exploration isn't that intrinsically exciting compared to later wide-open entries. I think something is lost with the dungeon design by de-emphasizing items, or maybe they just needed to be longer to compensate for the lack of that "two-part" feeling of a classic item-based dungeon. The dungeons are probably the strongest part of the game, since they are the most different from LttP, but they still do a lot of thematic lifting from the predecessor, which just further begs the comparison in my mind. At least I can say there aren't any real annoying parts of the game, which I'm not sure I could say for a lot of Zelda games before it, but it comes at an expense of being a little too basic.

### Halo 3

I am a huge fan of the first two Halo games, but after replaying their campaigns in recent years I felt like some of the magic was gone. I've always wanted to play 3, which I didn't have the money for at the time when it made the jump to 360, but without the nostalgia boost it seemed even less exciting than the other two. Now to be clear, those two _are_ still great games, but it turns out sometimes fresh experiences are better than revisited ones.

It helps that Halo 3 is a fresher game than its predecessor in general, iterating much more over 2 than 2 did over 1. There's a noticeable increase in the number of vehicle types, some new objectives like mid level scarab bosses, and subtle changes that keep you on your toes as you find familiar strategies don't always work anymore. The new grenade types and armor abilities are also a decent addition, even if I don't find them to be a revelation. I'm still not sure how I feel about the fight against Brutes instead of Elites, but at least the Brutes were revamped and given some more Elite-like qualities.

In contrast to 2 taking a dip later in the game, I feel like 3 takes a while to ramp up. The industrialized Earth settings of the early levels are a bit drab, but gradually it shows more of that combination of alien installations and nature settings I'm used to. I still think overall it is a bit thin on some of the level types that "feel like" Halo, but I also have to give it credit for not being as much of a retread in that regard. It's a minor complaint in any case. Otherwise, Halo 3 maintains the high standard of mixing small scale and large scale shooter gameplay I've come to expect. I found the squad gameplay to be a little more fleshed out, although you still can't directly give marines orders. It might also come at the expense of the solo levels, but there is a cool one late in the game that truly makes you feel the struggle of missing your allies. I don't have too much to say about the story, but one thing I love about Halo is that it feels epic without being tonally too serious. I mainly intended to play 3 just to cross one off the list that's subtly nagged at me for almost 20 years, but I should've known I was in for a genuinely awesome game.

### Castlevania: Portrait of Ruin

I was already disappointed by one DS Castlevania game this year, so I set my expectations much lower for Portrait of Ruin. That was a good idea, because that made it less disappointing! Note that this does not mean it's _better_ than Dawn of Sorrow. I'm not making a call on which of the two I prefer, but given the issues I had with DoS and how they were fixed in PoR, I'd have to say PoR is a case of be careful what you wish for.

The most original aspect of PoR is the dual character system, where you can switch between Charlotte and Jonathan, or bring both out at once (but still only controlling one directly, of course). In practice, Jonathan ends up being the superior character for most of the game, and for whatever neat potential there is with the two character action, most of the benefits are negated by the difficulty of managing them both effectively in battle. Or at least it's difficult for a newcomer to this game, but I'm not sure if it offered me enough otherwise to want to replay it later on.

The convoluted backtracking that arguably went too far in DoS is gone now, as this is the simplest Castlevania map yet - and also probably the worst. The size of the castle is shrunk down and instead you warp through portraits to other lands like towns and deserts. At first this was really cool, as it gets outside of the castle surroundings, but by a third of the way through it became apparent to me how useless a lot of these locales were. They retain the Metroid-style, but for the most part the objective is to defeat the one boss of the area, so they have a lot of extra fluff in them. And then when I got to the midpoint of the game, opening up new areas that recycle the same visual themes as the first half, it really felt like a letdown.

I don't know if PoR really has more combat than other Castlevania games, but with how exploration is de-emphaszied, it feels like a lot. Nonetheless, there is still some amount of backtracking, occassionally to a seemingly minor spot on the map that holds a crucial ability. I don't know if I like or dislike that, but it is weird in the context of a game where exploration has otherwise been greatly streamlined. At least there aren't random drops required to advance like in DoS, but there is still a heavy degree of grinding and farming/RNG if you wish to do all the sidequests and be well equipped to beat the final boss.

## Mini Reviews

These are games I didn't really have a ton to say about, but still wanted to document for my year's playthroughs.

### Mario Kart 8 Booster Course DLC

With my NSO expiring, I checked out all the booster course races. Playing them was mostly a reminder of what a great game MK8 is and how good it feels to race (when some bad luck frustration doesn't happen). Overall the pack was pretty fun, but not up to par with the base game, with the reliance on real-world based Tour courses feeling a little out of place. It was interesting to see that many of the courses had changing routes each lap, perhaps foretelling a key design gimmick for MK9?

### Shovel Knight

I replayed this in anticipation of selling it, but I don't have much to add about it that wasn't already said in my Top 100 review. If you like the games it is derived from but don't want to experience the frustration anymore, it's a great choice. After playing it again (just the Shovel of Hope campaign), it really is hard to think of a big flaw. There basically aren't any screens of the game that I felt were unfair or excessive - maybe 3 or 4 that were borderline, but that's it.

### Super Mario Maker 1 & 2

SMM2 is one I had to play again for a bit before my NSO subscription went up. It's a shame that 1 already sapped a lot of my creative energy, because I liked checking out most of the few levels I did make in 2, especially after they added Link to the game. SMM1 got revisited because I needed to hook up my Wii U, and it was a bit humbling going back to my own creations. It was always frustrating to pour hours into perfecting a level only to get bad numbers on it. But playing many of them years later, with almost fresh eyes that have forgotten both the tricks of the level and the pain of making it, it was easier to see that some I made just weren't very good.

### From Below (NES Homebrew)

Of the _MANY_ homebrews I played this year, probably the only one particularly worth mentioning, even though it is just a Tetris clone. However, it has a twist where a Kraken will appear from the bottom of the screen and push one column of blocks up, either with a timer or after a number of turns, based on the mode you choose. It's pretty professional looking, although given that fact, I was disappointed that the blocks weren't a bit more colorful and that the music is limited. An option to press select to hold a piece would've also been nice.

### Haunted Castle (Revisted)

It's easy to see why this is one of the Castlevania titles I had never heard of before. I gave the original a shot, also included with Castlevania Dominus collection, but with how hopelessly difficult it is, I gave up on the first stage. It just wasn't worth it with a remake also an option. The Revisited version is unsurprisingly very forgiving, maybe almost to a fault, but it also was nice because the game can be breezed through in one sitting. I like the graphics, which are improved but look like some lost 90s arcade game, or perhaps one of those 16-bit era consoles I'm not familiar with. Overall this is still a pretty forgettable addition to the Castlevania oeuvre, but it was a nice throw-in.

### Bloodborne

I made an ill-advised run at this as a thematically-appropriate October game, in spite of a busier-than-usual month for me in my personal life, on top of other October games. Sure I could play it in November or December (still in the future at the time of this writing), but I probably won't. That's not to say I'll wait a full year to pick it up again, but I don't think the mood is right for the rest of the year, so more detailed thoughts will have to wait.

### Tetris DS

Tetris is an undoubtedly great concept, but there are so many Tetris games that I often have my doubts that any given iteration will show me something novel with the concept. Tetris DS is surprisingly pretty interesting, as it leans heavily on theming from classic Nintendo games, and has some game modes I had not seen before, many of which specifically take advantage of the touch controls and two screens.

### Donkey Kong (1994)

I heard good things about Donkey Kong 94, but this was a bit of a letdown. Nonetheless, I did go through the whole thing. It is arcade style, sometimes to a fault, as the precision of certain jumps that you don't have great control over can be annoying. There are differing degrees of fall damage in the game, which can lead to some trial and error unless you have a really good eye for it, as I'd often find Mario rolling out of a medium fall into an obstacle. Perhaps these sources of difficulty are necessary evils given the limited screen space, and at least it's very generous with extra lives. Where DK94 really sings is the more puzzle-y elements that are introduced, where it deviates more from the original arcade games and feels more fair. Overall it's a pretty impressive package in the limited constraints, but it also had me yearning for games that were able to break away from those constraints and lean more into the puzzle aspect.
