# Movies

Because I can't help but write down every thought, here is a list of movies I've watched as well. Film isn't really my forte, but I do occasionally watch them. I'm only going to review movies I watch or rewatch going forward, and probably with pretty short reviews. This was started in August 2024.

I've devised a "ratings" system to summarize each one with:
- **Avoid**: Self-explanatory, movies that there is no reason to watch, though I would be surprised if I will even watch any in this tier myself.
- **Bad Watchable**: For films that are not conventionally good, but have some kind of value, so bad it's good, etc.
- **Watchable**: Something that's average, inoffensive, acceptable for a casual viewing, and so on.
    - **+/-**: Within this tier specifically, because I think it will encompass most things, I might also add a plus or minus. As one might guess, a minus is tilted more towards a film being bad, a plus towards being good, and neither is neutral.
- **Recommended**: Hopefully self-explanatory. Something I'd generally recommend to people, maybe barring dislike for the genre or whatever.
- **Essential**: Something nearly anyone should watch.

## The Super Mario Bros. Movie
### Watchable (-)

The Mario movie is something that pleased a lot of fans by simply having reverance for the source material, but with how closely Nintendo was involved, that's kind of a given. There isn't much point to this film, as it's like a big commercial for Mario for people who already like Mario. Underneath the revered franchise it's a typical middling children's animated movie - celebrity casting, surface level plotting and jokes, cliches of all sorts. I hope that possible sequels at least have more going on with some of the "worldbuilding" out of the way. Movie #1 is so crammed with references, sometimes fun (I like the throwback to the bros being from Brooklyn), but sometimes pointless (Mario Kart feels like commercial appeal filler from their best-selling Mario games), that it leaves even less room for anything of substance.

## Star Wars Prequel Trilogy

Here we go with a special case, three reviews in one. There's almost no point in rating them since something as ubiquitous as Star Wars is "essential", but in a vaccum are these films really all that must watch? Well I certainly wasn't a fan when I saw them in theaters as a kid, so much so that I think these might actually be my first rewatches of any. Are they really as bad as I remember?

### Episode 1: The Phantom Menace

Well as we start off, the answer is sort of. It's hard to argue against the individual parts being as bad as I remembered/expected: the CGI, the Gungans, the ethnic steretoype characters, the midichlorians, the weird age gap romance, much of the dialogue and acting in general. But in the sum total, I honestly didn't dislike it as much as I expected. The overall plot is okay and I think the consensus around there being too much politicking is a little overblown (but how that goes in the second episode remains to be seen).

But... in comparison to the original trilogy (OT), it really shows a lot of weaknesses. A trade blockade _is_ a lame conflict setup compared to a planet-destroying superweapon. Instead of a villain with an instant commanding presence like Vader, we get these doofy Asian caricature guys. Most of the villainry happens without any direct awareness from the protagonists, hence the movie's title, but it really deflates the stakes within the context of this film by itself, and anyone familiar with the OT can too easily see what's really going on. The fateful showdown with Darth Maul is one of the better scenes, but I was surprised for how heavily marketed I remember him being back in the day that he was barely in it. He looks cool but he merely functions as a right-hand man we don't learn much about. And he's dispatched almost as soon as he's introduced, along with the film's best character.

TPM is a pretty ugly movie - ironically, the gritty desert planet of Tattooine might be the best looking part. It's here that we get some of the rawness that made the OT films feel a bit more real, although plenty of CGI background characters show up. And of course here we also have the pod race, which is the most memorable part of it, but even that is stuffed with unfortunate Jar Jar and Jake Lloyd moments. I was a little put off by how readily Anakin's mother let her prepubescent son run off with a man she met a couple days ago. This is the sort of thing that is just sort of glossed over for the sake of moving the story along (like Paplatine's rapid ascension as well). That's really what TPM is, a bunch of frantic table setting, that may be leading up to something, but it doesn't really carry a whole lot of weight by itself. Also, that what it's building up to was _not much_ based on my recollection of Episode 2, but it's time to see if that's still the case.

### Episode 2: Attack of the Clones

AotC is mostly a resounding improvement over TPM, but it does retain some of the same problems, namely the acting and CGI. Seeing it again reminded me of the big controversy over CG clone troopers, and yeah, it's rather inexcusable. For the sweeping army shots, sure, but why in close shots with only a few of them too? There's also plenty of goofy CG-heavy scenes that I had blocked out of my memory, like the factory and the car chase.

AotC is mainly an improvement for its greater sense of focus, a more clear story thread that isn't trying to cram quite as much in at once. But the prequels are still rather crammy. I think their biggest fundamental flaw is simply that they were prescribed to need to set certain events in motion, which ends up hamfisted. The characters' actions are sometimes difficult to justify, as if they aren't real people but rather know that they are in a film and need to advance certain plots.

Take the Anakin and Padme romance, which is the worst part of the movie. Isn't it pretty weird that a prepubescent boy who briefly spent time with an older girl was left thinking about her every day for ten years? And then he tells her this, which is very creepy, and at first Padme does seem creeped out, until for some (plot-necessary) reason she starts falling for him after he talks about sand. Then she seems barely fazed by his contining questionable behavior. I can see what Lucas was going for, laying Anakin's flaws bare, because we all know where his fate is headed, but I feel like it still would've been nice to portray him as a more likable character. Yeah we know he is going to turn, but it would've been more devastating if he wasn't always so rambunctious. That might have a difficult arc to convey in three films, but add that to the reasons I've always felt it would be better to skip over childhood Anakin.

Less Jar Jar was one more welcome change, but having him be a key in the emergency powers authorization was a pretty absurd moment. Christopher Lee as Dooku also feels like a deliberate play to add some of the gravitas that was missing from TPM, although he certainly can't match up to Vader as a character. Jango Fett... whatever. I never really understood where the popularity of Boba took off given how relatively small his apperance is in the OT. The clone wars was something I never felt too invested in when I first watched these movies, as Star Wars at its best was more about character melodrama, but it is also hard to argue against a movie called Star _Wars_ having them. And now that they are set in motion, the stage is set for part 3.

### Episode 3: Revenge of the Sith

When I first saw RotS, I thought how could Anakin so easily be swayed to the dark side? But now I think how were we supposed to believe he was ever supposed to be the ultimate Jedi in the first place? Even in the "good" Anakin we see someone who was never really committed to the doctrine. His greatest strength is his raw power with the Force. It does give the viewer something to think about with Palpatine telling Anakin the Jedi are equally covetous of power, like maybe there is a grain of truth to his deceptions. An endless amount of commentary has been made about the moral grayness of the Jedi raised by the prequels, but at best I get mixed messages, and by my recollection Lucas has been on record that they are the clear good guys.

The Jedi _are_ stubborn and dogmatic, sure, but in the end they are proven right. Or at least it's a mutual case of self-fulfilling prophecies. The Jedi distrust Anakin, and in turn he loses faith in them, and then he proves to be the danger they feared. Anakin choosing his personal love for Padme over protecting peace, even when he knew it was at stake, shows the Jedi were correct about giving up romance. And the scene with Palpatine and Windu is kind of weak - why does Anakin immediately give himself over to Palpatine rather than continuing to try to play both sides? It's not like Padme was in immediate danger at that moment, and Anakin sent Windu himself. So I still think he is too easily swayed, but it's less of a complaint for me now than the trilogy-long failure to make Anakin a true tragic figure.

A lesser issue, but RotS also continues a prequel-wide problem of not doing much with its secondary villains. Killing off Count Dooku so early in the film to be replaced with another CG character is super lame. Grievous doesn't even last long either, and just serves as an excuse to split up Obi-Wan and Anakin. At least there is a climactic fight with the new Darth Vader. The Mustafar scenes are probably the most iconic of the prequels for me, but even they are a little bogged down by uneven acting and over the top CGI that sometimes pushes it into unintentionally funny territory. Nonetheless, the continued trend of toning down the bad dialogue and having more focus makes this easily still the best of the prequels.
